MANU/SC/0333/1991
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 4094 of 1984
Decided On: 05.04.1991
Appellants:A.N. Sehgal and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Raje Ram Sheoram and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
K.N. Singh and K. Ramaswamy, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: P.P. Rao, Sr. Adv. and Janendra Lal, Adv
For Respondents/Defendant: S.C. Gupta, Rajinder Sachar, Sudarshan Goyal, Vivek Bhandari and S.C. Patel, Advs.
Subject: Service
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 16(1), Constitution Of India - Article 309
Cases Referred:
J.C. Yadav v. State of Haryana, MANU/SC/0159/1990; K.K. Khosla v. State of Haryana, MANU/SC/0197/1990; R.P. Khanna v. S.A.F. Abbas, MANU/SC/0148/1973; B.S. Yadav v. State of Haryana, MANU/SC/0159/1990; M.S. Mighlani v. State of Haryana and Anr. (1983) 1 Serv LR 421 : 1983 Lab IC 1458; V.B. Badami etc. v. State of Mysore MANU/SC/0500/1975; K.C. Joshi and Ors. etc. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0061/1991; Baleshwar Dass and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Ors. etc. MANU/SC/0411/1980; The Direct Recruit, Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra and Ors. MANU/SC/0291/1990
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 9.7.1984 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in civil Writ Petition No. 5371 of1981
Disposition:
Disposed of
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  7

Relied On
  2

Case Note:

Service - seniority - Rules 2, 3, 5 and 12 of Haryana Service of Engineers, Class I, P.W.D. (Roads and Buildings) Rules, 1960 - appellants promotees from class II service while respondent was direct recruit - controversy centers around inter se seniority of appellants and respondents - Supreme Court observed that promotee was member of service from date of initial promotion while direct recruit would always be recruited and appointed to substantive vacancy - treated as member of service subject to his successful completion of probation - appointment by promotion or direct recruitment must be in accordance with rules and seniority to be fixed in accordance with principles laid down in rules - held, direction is given to State Government to issue Orders appointing substantively to respective posts within quota - determine inter se seniority within four months of Judgment - seniority of promotees and direct recruits to be determined accordingly.
ORDER
K. Ramaswamy, J.
1. The appellants and the proforma respondents, thirty in numbers are employed in the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II. The Governor, in exercise of the power under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India framed the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, P.W.D. (Roads and Buildings) Rules, 1960, for short 'the Rules' constituting the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, P.W.D. (Roads and Buildings Branch). After the formation of State of Haryana w.e.f. November 1, 1966, the rules are called Haryana Service of Engineers, Class I, P.W.D. (Roads and Buildings Branch). The services consist of Asstt. Executive Engineers, Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers, and Chief Engineers, as may be specified by the Government of Haryana from time to time (Rule 3(1). The recruitment to the service is made by the government as per Rule 5(1); (a) by direct recruitment; (b) by transfer from any other services of the State Govt. or of the Union of India; and (c) by promotion from Haryana Engineers, Class II Service. The appellants for short 'the promotees from Class II Service were promoted as Executive Engineers by relaxing five years length of service as Class II Engineers in officiating capacity on various dates between January 6, 1969 to May 29, 1971, Three of them, namely, A.N. Sehgal, Raj Kumar and H.C. Sethi were confirmed as Executive Engineers w.e.f. July 11, 1973, December 11, 1974 and December 9, 1975 respectively. The rest are yet to be confirmed. Raje Ram Sheoran was recruited and appointed directly as Asstt. Executive Engineer w.e.f. October 25, 1971. He too was given relaxation of the length of service of five years as Asstt. Executive Engineer and was promoted as Executive Engineer on October 8, 1973. He was confirmed w.e.f. December 22, 1976. All the appellants except M.R. Gupta were further promoted as Superintending Engineers on different dates between 1980 to 1984 and Mr. Sheoran was promoted as Superintending Engineer on March 4, 1987. A.N. Sehgal was further promoted as Chief Engineer. Equally Mr. Sheoran was also promoted as Chief Engineer but the validity was challenged and it is not necessary to refer any further as it is subject matter of proceedings in the High Court.
2. R.R. Sheoran who was shown junior to the appellants, filed Writ Petition No. 5371/81 and sought a writ of mandamus directing the second respondent, State Government to consider his case for promotion as Superintending Engineer from the date on which the respondents were promoted; to quash the gradation list; to assign the seniority over the appellants and the consequential reliefs. On reference, a Division Bench of the High Court by its judgment dated July 9, 1984 agreed with the ratio laid down in M.S. Mighlani v. State of Haryana and Anr. [1983] 1 S.L.R. 421 and held that R.R. Sheoran was a member of the service from the date of his initial appointment as Asstt. Executive Engineer and the appellants and the proforma respondents are not members of the service and directed the learned Single Judge to dispose of the matter on merit. This appeal on leave arises against the judgment of the Division Bench.
3. The controversy centers round the inter se seniority of the appellants and R.R. Sheoran. For its determination the Rules need interpretation. The counsel for parties agreed that we should decide the principles on consideration of the Rules and leave the matter for the State Govt. to determine the inter se seniority by applying the law, so far as the controversy relating to relaxation of the length of service is concerned it is set at rest by this Court in J.C. Yadav v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0159/1990 : (1990)IILLJ138SC and K.K. Khosla v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0197/1990 : (1990)IILLJ144SC by a bench of three Judges to which one of us (K.N. Singh, J.) was a member. The only question which survives is as to when 'the appellants' and 'R.R. Sheoran' became members of the respective services.
4. Shri P.P. Rao, learned Senior Counsel for the appellants contends that the appellants were promoted as Executive Engineers against regular vacancies, which were neither a stop-gap arrangement nor fortuitous, and they continued in service without any break from the respective dates of their promotion, therefore, they are members of the service in a substantive capacity as Executive Engineers from the respective dates of promotion. He further argued that since Raje Ram Sheoran was recruited as Asstt. Executive Engineer w.e.f. August 30, 1971 long after the promotion of the appellants upto B.L. Goyal, the appellants are seniors to R.R. Sheoran as Executive Engineers. Proviso to Rule 5(2) entitles them to remain in a substantive capacity as Executive Engineers since requisite number of qualified Asstt. Executive Engineers were not available for promotion. In view of their continuous officiation as Executive Engineers in terms of Rule 2(12)(a) of the rules, they must be deemed to be the members of the service from the dates of promotion and, therefore, they are seniors to R.R. Sheoran. M/s. Sachhar, learned Counsel for the State and Gupta for R.R. Sheoran on the other hand contended that unless the appellants were appointed substantively to the cadre posts they could not be members of the service. R.R. Sheoran became member of the service from the date of his initial appointment as Asstt. Executive Engineer, therefore, he is senior to the appellants and proforma respondents and the High Court rightly interpreted Rule 5(2). Since the High Court did not enter into the merits of the respective claims of the appellants and Sheoran, we express no opinion on merits except, as agreed by the parties, we declare the law on the interpretation of the rules and leave it to the State Govt. to decide the inter se seniority on merits.
5. It is necessary to have a look into the Rules regulating the service. Rule 3(1) postulates that the service shall comprise of Assistant Executive Engineers, Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers. Rule 3(2) read with appendix 'A' enjoins the State of Haryana to determine the cadre strength of service each year. Appendix 'A' lays down procedure to determine the cadre strength of service. The senior posts include Executive Engineers and above while the junior scale posts include Asstt. Executive Engineers. Ex-cadre posts also are contemplated in the respective senior posts and junior scale posts. Rule 5(1)(a) posits recruitment to the service: (a) by direct recruitment; (b) by transfer and (c) by promotion from Class II service. Sub-rule (4) of Rule 5 says that all direct appointments to the service shall be to the post of Asstt. Executive Engineer. Proviso therein gives power to the government to appoint by direct recruitment as Executive Engineers, in exceptional circumstances, for reasons to be recorded in writing. Rules 6 and 7 prescribe qualifications and method of appointment by direct recruitment. Sub-rule (3) of Rule 7 states that appointment to the service shall be made according to the number of vacancies to be filled by direct recruitment strictly in the order of merit as indicated by the Public Service Commission. As per Rule 11(1) a direct recruit shall remain on probation for a period of two years or extended period upto maximum of three years. On satisfactory completion of probation, the government may confirm under Clause (a) of Sub-rule (3) of Rule 11 or to discharge him from service otherwise. The post of Asstt. Executive Engineer is a junior scale post. Under Rule 12(3), the year of allotment of an Asstt. Executive Engineer shall be the calender year in which the order of appointment is issued by the government.
6. Rule 2(1) defines appointment to the service which includes an appointment made according to the terms and provisions of the rules to an officiating vacancy or to an ex-cadre post provided that an officer so appointed shall not be deemed to have become a member of the service as defined in Clause (12) of Rule 2. The Asstt. Executive Engineer means a member of the service in the junior scale of pay, (Rule 2(2)). Cadre post means permanent post in the service as per Rule 2(3). 'Class II Service' means the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II, in the Buildings and Roads Branch and includes, for purposes of promotion to and fixation of seniority in the Class I Service, Temporary Asstt. Engineers when a suitable Class II Officer is not available vide Rule 2(5). Direct appointment means an appointment by open competition but does not include-(a) an appointment made by promotion; (b) an appointment by transfer of an officer from the service of the State Government or of the Union, (Rule 2(7). Ex-cadre post means a temporary post of the same rank as a cadre post vide Rule 2(10). A member of the service means an officer appointed Substantively to a cadre post and includes (a) in the case of a direct appointment an officer on probation, or such an officer who, having successfully completed his probation, awaits appointment to a cadre post vide Rule 2(12)(a).
7. A reading of the rules clearly indicates that an Asstt. Executive Engineer appointed by open competition to a substantive vacancy in a cadre post and put on probation is a member of the service. Equally such Asstt. Executive Engineer recruited by open competition and appointment to an ex cadre post and put on probation and who having successfully completed his probation and awaits appointment to a cadre post would also become a member of the service. The contention of Shri P.P. Rao is that an officer appointed substantively to a cadre post is a direct recruit and the inclusive definition encompasses within its ambit the promotee and the phrase "such an officer who having successfully completed his probation and awaits appointment to the cadre post" is only referable to a promotee. So promotee is also a member of the service from the date of initial promotion. We may make it clear at this juncture that in normal service jurisprudence a direct recruit would always be recruited and appointed to a substantive vacancy and from the date he starts discharging the duty attached to the post he is a member of the service subject to his successfully completing the probation and declaration thereof at a later date and his appointment relates back to the date of initial appointment, subject to his being discharged from service on failure to complete the probation within or extended period or termination of the service according to rules. Equally it is settled law that a promotee would have initial officiating promotion to a temporary vacancy or substantive vacancy and on successful completion and declaration of the probation, unless reverted to lower posts, he awaits appointment to a substantive vacancy. Only on appointment to a substantive vacancy he becomes a member of the service. But confirmation and appointment to a substantive vacancy always an inglorious uncertainty and would take unduly long time. therefore, the confirmation or appointment to a substantive capacity would not normally be a condition precedent to reckon the continuous length of service for the purpose of seniority. On the facts of the case and the settled legal position, at first blush the argument of Shri P.P. Rao carried weight that the appellants would get their seniority from the respective dates of the initial promotion as Executive Engineers. But we find that in the instant case the rules have made departure from the normal service jurisprudence as would appear from the scheme under the rules.
8. Para 11(b) of appendix 'A' read with Rule 3(2), while determining the cadre strength of the service, adumbrates creation and appointment of Asstt. Executive Engineers (direct recruit) to an ex-cadre junior scale post in each year. therefore in a given situation, a direct recruit appointed to an ex-cadre post, cannot be kept in lurch until he is appointed to a cadre post so as to become a member of the service. Obviously to avoid such a hiatus, Rule 2(12)(a) was introduced. The main part of Rule 2(12)(a) declares that an appointee substantively to a cadre post i.e., permanent post is a member of the service. The inclusive definition brings an officer 'by direct appointment on probation' who having successfully completed probation and awaits appointment to a cadre post is also a member of the service. Take for instance if direct recruitment is made to fill in five posts of Asstt. Executive Engineers of which four are cadre posts and one ex-cadre post and four persons are appointed to cadre posts in the order of merit and the last one to the ex-cadre post. The first four officers appointed on probation to the substantive vacancies and they are covered by the main part of Rule 2(12)(a). The fifth one intended to cover the field of operation of the inclusive definition which says that 'and also includes an officer directly appointed on probation' 'and such an officer who having successfully completed his probation, awaits appointment to a cadre post'. The words 'and such an officer' 'directly appointed' would obviously referable to an Asstt. Executive Engineer directly appointed to an ex-cadre post; who may be placed on probation and awaits appointment to a cadre post. By operation of the definition clause he also becomes the member of the service from the date of initial appointment. This view is further fortified by the definition of the 'appointment to the service' in Rule 2(1) which says that appointment to the service includes an appointment made according to the terms and provisions of these rules to an officiating vacancy or to an ex-cadre post. Rule 2(7) says that direct appointment means appointment by open competition but excludes 'promotee' or 'transferee'. So a promotee promoted to an officiating vacancy or on ex-cadre post does not become member of the service unless he is appointed substantively to a cadre post. We, therefore, hold that a direct recruit appointed to an ex-cadre post alone is a member of the service even while on probation and Rule 2(12)(a) applies to them and it does not apply to promotee from Class II service.
9. An Asstt. Executive Engineer, on putting five years of service under Rule 9(3)(a) and passing the departmental examination as required under Rule (15), (unless the qualifications are relaxed in exercise of the power under Rule (22) of the rules) becomes eligible for promotion as Executive Engineer. The State Govt. had relaxed the required length of five years service of the promotees as well as direct recruits. R.R. Sheoran therefore became eligible to be considered for promotion. As per the procedure prescribed in this regard under Rule 9(2), he was found fit and suitable and was promoted as an Executive Engineer w.e.f. October 8, 1973. Though M/s. Sachhar and Gupta contended that the direct recruit need not undergo the required probation as Executive Engineer, we find no force in the contention. The normal channel of appointment to the post of Executive Engineer, a senior post, is by way of promotion to which a direct recruit Asstt. Executive Engineer is entitled to be considered. On promotion he shall be on probation for a period of one year as per Rule 11(1)(a), but the period spent on officiation as Executive Engineer shall be taken into account for purposes of completing the period of probation and on its successful completion, he shall remain in service as Executive Engineer. On a conjoint reading of Rule 12(3) and 12(5) it is clear that the year of allotment of the Asstt. Executive Engineer in the post of Executive Engineer, shall be the calendar year in which the order of appointment as Asstt. Executive Engineer had been made. Thus his seniority as Executive Engineer, by fiction of law, would relate back to his date of initial appointment as Asstt. Executive Engineer and in Juxta position to Class II officers' seniority as Executive Engineer is unalterable. The date of the seniority of Mr. R.R. Sheoran 1971.
10. The question then is what is the date from which the seniority of a promotee as Executive Engineer shall be reckoned? The contention of Shri P.P. Rao is that Rule 5(2) reserves 50% of the posts to the direct recruits but the proviso thereto makes a built in relaxation, namely, so long as the required number of direct recruits are not available to occupy those posts, the promotees are entitled to hold those posts also. Admittedly except R.R. Sheoran no other direct recruit was available. The promotees are eligible to occupy all the cadre posts even in excess of their quota. The seniority has to be determined from the respective dates of initial officiating promotion. Shri Rao' further contention that the phrase 'such an officer appointed to an officiating post' has reference only to promotees cannot be accepted for the reasons given earlier. The officer appointed directly is referable only to Asstt. Executive Engineer and a promotee by operation of Rule 2(7) stands excluded until he is appointed substantively to a cadre post.
11. When an officer is appointed substantively to a cadre post, is the next question. It is settled law that all the rules should be harmoniously construed giving life, force and effect to every part of the rule or clause or word so that no part would be rendered redundant, ineffectual, nugatory or otiose. Rule 5(1) regulates recruitment to the service from three sources, namely, direct recruitment; by transfer and by promotion from Class II service. Sub-rule (2) thereof prescribes the ratio between the promotees and others. It says that, "recruitment to the service shall be so regulated that the number of posts so filled by promotion from Class II service shall not exceed 50%" of the number of posts in the service excluding the posts of Asstt. Executive Engineers; provided that till such time the adequate number of Asstt. Executive Engineers who are eligible and considered fit for promotion are available, the actual percentage of officers promoted from Class II service 'may be larger than 50%. A reading thereof clearly manifests the legislative animation, namely, that the promotees from Class II service shall not exceed 50% of the posts in the service. The word 'shall' indicates that it is mandatory that the remaining 50%) shall be kept open only to the Asstt. Executive Engineers who were directly recruited but later were found eligible and fit for promotion as Executive Engineers. therefore, unless the government resorts exceptionally with prior permission of Public Service Commission, vide Rule 10 to recruitment by transfer of an officer from other service of the State Govt. or of the Union, the remaining 50% of the posts as Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineers and Chief Engineers shall be occupied only by the direct recruit Asstt. Executive Engineers.