MANU/SC/1795/2006
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3967 and 3968/1994 and 4711-4713 of 1998 and Cont. Pet. No. ... in Civil Appeal No. 3967 of 1994
Decided On: 29.03.2006
Appellants: Akhil Bharat Gosewa Sangh and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: State of A.P. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Y.K. Sabharwal, C.J. and Tarun Chatterjee, J.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: N.N. Goswami and Manmohan, Sr. Advs., B.S. Banthia, R.K. Joshi, Jasraj Shrimal, Sushil Kumar Jain, Pratibha Jain, Sheela Goel (NP), H.M. Singh (NP), Dhruv Mehta, Mohit Chaudhary, Shalini Gupta, S.K. Mehta, Manoj Saxena, S.K. Mettra, Mohanprasad Meharia, Hemant Sharma, Shreekant N. Terdal, Divya Roy, Manish Jha, Bina Gupta, Sunil Kumar Jain, Manish Kumar, S. Borthakur, Pinky Anand, D.N. Govurdhan, Geeta Luthra, Nikhil Nayyar, Urmila Sirur, D.S. Mahra (NP), Revathy Raghavan (NP), D. Bharathi Reddy (NP) and Sanjay R. Hegde (NP), Advs
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1951 - Section 9; INDUSTRIES (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1951 - Section 11; ANDHRA PRADESH PROHIBITION OF COW SLAUGHTER AND ANIMAL PRESERVATION ACT, 1977 - Section 5, ANDHRA PRADESH PROHIBITION OF COW SLAUGHTER AND ANIMAL PRESERVATION ACT, 1977 - Section 6
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 195; Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 18, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1), Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(a), Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(g), Constitution Of India - Article 19(2), Constitution Of India - Article 19(6), Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 25, Constitution Of India - Article 26, Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 37, Constitution Of India - Article 39(b), Constitution Of India - Article 47, Constitution Of India - Article 48, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 191; Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 11, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 16, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 17, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 2(i), Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 20, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 25, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 25(3), Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 26, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 4(2)(a), Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 4(2)(f)
Cases Referred:
Akhil Bharat Goseva Sangh v. State of A.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0924/1995; Akhil Bharat Goseva Sangh and Ors. v. State of A.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/1122/1997; Systopic Laboratories (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Dr. Prein Gupta and Ors. 1994 Suppl.(1) SCC 160; K. Vasudevan Nair and Ors. v. U.O.I. and Ors. MANU/SC/0413/1990; Mohd. Hanif Quareshi and Ors. v. The State of Bihar MANU/SC/0027/1958; State of Gujarat v. Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat and Ors. MANU/SC/1352/2005; Kesavananda Bharathi v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0445/1973
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Final Judgment and Order dated 6.4.1993 of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad in W.P. No. 13062/1992 (MANU/AP/0043/1993)
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  2

Dissented
  1

Mentioned
  1

Relied On
  2

Case Note:
(1) Constitution of India - Articles 19 (1) (g), 21, 48 and 48A--Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951--Sections 9 and 11--A. P. Prohibition of Cow Slaughter and Animal Preservation Act, 1977--Sections 5 and 6--Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974--Sections 25 and 26--Environmental Protection Rules, 1986--Rule 3 read with Schedule I, Entry 50B--Slaughter house--Company Al-Kabeer granted permission to run slaughter house on selected site--Letter of intent (LOI) granted by Central Government under Industries (Development and Regulation) Act to establish new industrial undertaking for manufacturing certain amount of 'frozen buffalo' and 'mutton meat'--Litigations ensued--But functioning of Al-Kabeer would not result in depletion of buffalo population of hinterland--Age of slaughterable buffaloes prescribed as above 10 years--No question of striking down policy of Government on export of meat--Consistent policy of G.O.I. to encourage export of meat and meat products--Necessary directions issued.

The Supreme Court issued the following directions :

1. The A.P.P.C.B. (Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board) is hereby directed to rectify its consent order given to Al-Kabeer following Rule 3 read with Schedule 1, Entry 50B of the Environmental Protection Rules, 1986. In the event abattoir fails to comply with such rectified consent order of the A.P.P.C.B., it would be open to the authorities to direct closure of the Al-Kabeer unit.

2. The A.P.P.C.B. is directed to file reports before the State Government as well as Central Government relating to compliance with the pollution standards by Al-Kabeer specified under its consent order in compliance with the Environmental Protection Rules, 1986, once in every three months.

3. The Company is directed to regularly monitor pollution of air and water by its abattoir. It is further directed to file a report of its compliance with the Environmental laws, particularly, the Environmental Protection Rules, 1986, before the A.P.P.C.B. every month.

4. Al-Kabeer is directed to file reports before the State Government on cattle population in its surrounding areas once every year. The State Government shall examine the correctness of the said report and thereafter take appropriate action.

5. The State Government is directed to monitor regularly and strictly in respect of Al-Kabeer's compliance with all applicable laws, particularly the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Prohibition of Cow Slaughter and Animal Preservation Act, 1977, once every three months and to obtain reports on the same and thereafter to take necessary action for their proper implementation.

6. The Company is directed to prepare a plan in consultation with the State Government and take up its implementation in conjunction with the State Government for promoting better animal husbandry practices within the next three months. The State Government is directed to take all the necessary steps for this purpose.

7. Modernizing the existing abattoirs in the State is advisable and in that regard the State Government may take steps that it considers necessary.

8. Finally, the Central Government is directed to review the meat export policy, in the light of the Directive Principles of State Policy under the Constitution of India, and also in the light of the policy's potentially harmful effects on livestock population, and therefore on the economy of the country.

(2) Mysore Prevention of Cow Slaughter and Cattle Preservation Act, 1964--Sections 4, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 18--Total ban on slaughter of bovine cattle--Section 5 not imposing total ban--But it cannot be said to be ultra vires the Constitution--Direction to State Government to strictly enforce and implement provisions of Sections 4, 8 to 11 and 18--And take action on violations thereof--Further direction to State Government to maintain proper institutions for providing care and protection to cattle in light of Section 18.
JUDGMENT
Tarun Chatterjee, J.
1. A1-Kabeer Exports Limited (in short 'Company') is a public company formed for the purpose of carrying on the business of processing meat, mainly for export purposes. The company with a view to establish a slaughter house in Rudraram village, in the Medak. District of the State of Andhra Pradesh applied to the Gram Panchayat , Rudraram for the requisite permission to construct a factory and other buildings connected therewith. On 24th March 1989, the Gram Panchayat concerned, issued a 'No Objection Certificate' (in short NOC'). After obtaining opinion of the District Medical and Health Officer, Director of Town Planning and Director of Factories, State of Andhra Pradesh, permission was granted to the company to run a slaughter house on the selected site on. 29th June 1989.
2. Prior to this permission, the Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board (for short 'A.P.P.C.B.') also issued a 'NOC' on the application of the company filed on December 30, 1988, subject to certain, conditions concerning the treatment, of effluents and air pollution. In the said NOC, it was inter-alia stipulated that the company shall obtain a second NOC' and a regular consent under Sections 25 and 26 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 from A.P.P.C.B. before commencing regular production. The Director, Animal Husbandry Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh also issued a NOC in favour of the company by a letter dated July 13, 1989, subject to compliance with the provisions of Sections 5 and 6 of the Andhra Pradesh Prohibition of Cow Slaughter and Animal Preservation Act, 1977 (in short the 'A.P. Act) and the instructions issued there under.
3. Subsequently, on 18th July 1989 the Central Government (Ministry of Industry) granted a Letter of Intent (in short 'L.O.I.') under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (in short IDR Act') for establishment of a new industrial undertaking to the company at the selected site mentioned herein earlier for manufacturing of certain amount of Frozen Buffalo and Mutton Meat, The LOI was granted, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buffaloes to be slaughtered shall be subject to anti-mortem and post-mortem examination by the concerned authorities.
(b) Only old and useless buffaloes shall be slaughtered and for this purpose, their production and processing shall be subject to continuous inspection by the Municipal Authorities. Animal Husbandry and Health Department of the State Government or any other arrangement that the Central or the State Government may evolve for ensuring this.
(c) Slaughter of cows of all ages and calves of cows and buffaloes male or female, shall be prohibited.
(d) The company shall undertake measures for preserving and improving the breeds of the buffaloes by adoption of suitable animal husbandry practices in consultation with the State Government.
(e) At least 90% production of frozen buffalo meat would be exported for a period of ten years which 'may be extended by another five years at the discretion of the Government.
(f) Adequate steps shall be taken to the satisfaction of the Government to prevent air, water and soil pollution. Such anti-pollution measures to 'be installed should conform, to the effluent and emission standards prescribed by the State Government, in which the factory of the industrial undertaking is located.
(g) The new industrial undertaking or the industrial activity for effecting substantial expansion or for manufacture of new article shall not be located within:
(i) 50 kilometers from the boundary of the standard urban area limits of any city having a population of more than 25 lakhs according to the 1981 census; or
(ii) 30 kilometers from the boundary of the standard urban, area limits of any city having a population of more than 15 lakhs but less than 25 lakhs according to the 1981 census;
(h) In case the location of the industrial undertaking is in no Industry District., change of location from No Industry District to any other area including a notified backward area either within the same State or outside the State will not normally be allowed.
4. The recommendation was also made by the State of Andhra Pradesh to grant, industrial licence to set up abattoir slaughter house at the selected site.
5. If we are permitted to read the various conditions for grant of LOI. issued by the Central Government, carefully, it would be evident that only old and useless buffaloes shall be available for slaughtering and their production and processing shall be subject to continuous inspection by the Municipal Authorities, Department of Animal Husbandly and Health Department of the State Government. Clause (c) of the LOI speaks of total prohibition of slaughtering of cows of all ages and calves of cows and buffaloes, male or female. Clause (d) invites the company to undertake measures of prohibiting and improving the breeds of the buffaloes by adoption of suitable animal husbandry practices in consultation with the State Government, Clause (e) of L.O.I, provides that 90% of the production of frozen buffalo meat would be exported for a period of ten years which may be extended by five years at the discretion of the Government. Clause (f) directs to take adequate steps to the satisfaction of the Government to prevent air, water and soil pollution and for this purpose anti pollution measures must be installed to enforce the effluent and emission standards prescribed by the State Government. Clause (g) of the LOT says that a new industrial undertaking shall not be located either for effecting substantial expansion or for manufacture of new article if the said location is situated within 50 km from the boundary of the standard urban area of any city having a population of more than 25 lakhs according to 1981 census or is located 30 kin from the boundary of the standard urban area limit of any city having a population of more than 15 lakhs but less than 25 lakhs according to 1981 census. On 28th August 1991 the Agriculture and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority informed the company that the Government of India was keen to promote the export of meat and meat products as part of its export drive.
6. It is an admitted position that for the purpose of running the slaughter house, the company, as noted herein earlier, had applied for licences to various authorities of the State Government as well as of the Central Government. Having been satisfied and after holding enquiry, permission and/or licence was granted to the company first for the purpose of making construction at the site in question and thereafter for running the slaughter house. Such being the position and in view of the reasons given hereinafter we cannot apprehend that the company was permitted, by the authorities, first to make construction of the factory at the selected site and thereafter to run the slaughter house without being satisfied that the conditions for grant of permission and licence were observed by the company.
7. It is not in dispute that on the basis of the LOI and permission granted by the State of Andhra Pradesh and other authorities including the APPGB, the company started its construction work for installation of buildings and machineries, for the purpose of running a slaughter house. When some construction had progressed, the Executive Officer of the Gram Panchayat concerned issued a notice in the exercise of his power under Section 131 (3) of the Andhra Pradesh Grain Panchayat Act, 1964 suspending the permission granted for construction of the factory building and other buildings to the company and thereby directed stoppage of constructions until further orders. Challenging this order of the Executive Officer, the company filed a Writ Petition before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. Some organizations opposed the proposed establishment of the slaughter house and they were impleaded as respondents to the said writ petition. The writ petition was, however, subsequently withdrawn by the company and instead a revision petition was filed before the State Government questioning the notice issued by the Executive Officer on the suspension of the construction work which was permitted by the State Government. After healing all the concerned parties, by an order dated 15th September 1990 the revision case was allowed by the State Government. A bare reading of this order would show that the order of the Executive Officer was not only directed to be set aside but also the period of completing the construction work was extended by one more year, from 29th of June 1989.
8. Against the order passed in the revision, case, two writ petitions being W.P.No. 13763 and W.P.No. 13808 of 1990 were filed in the High Court - one by those organizations who were impleaded in the earlier writ petition and the other by some individuals. These two writ petitions were admitted by a learned Single Judge of the High Court and by an interim order, the operation of the order passed in the revision case was suspended pending decision of the two writ petitions. Against the aforesaid interim order, the State Government as well as the company filed writ appeals which were admitted by a Division Bench of the High Court, and the interim order granted by the learned Single Judge was stayed by an interim order of the Division Bench of the High Court. When the writ appeals came up for final hearing, the parties before the Division Bench prayed that the writ petitions he disposed of on merits. Such stand having been taken by the parties before the Division Bench, the writ petitions were heard and disposed of by an order dated November 16. 1991 on merits with the following directions:
...However, we direct that the State Government shall prepare a detailed report regarding the water, air and environment pollution, if any, as at present in Rudraram and surrounding villages of Patancheru Mandal, Medak District having regard to the, provisions of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. 1974. the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. 1981 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the rules made thereunder, the likely effect of the setting up of the mechanized slaughter house at Rudraram village on the prevailing environment and also its likely effect on the cattle wealth in the area after considering the representations which the petitioners in these writ, petitions and other interested parties may submit in writing in this regard. The petitioners herein and other interested persons shall submit the representations and other supporting material in writing to the State Government within four weeks from today. The State Government shall prepare and submit a detailed report to the Central Government, within eight weeks from the date of receipt of the copy of Oils judgment. On receipt of the report, the Central Government shall consider the same, having regard to the provisions of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. 1974. the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. 1981, the Environment (Protection) Act. 1986 and the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and pass appropriate orders in relation to the establishment of the mechanized slaughter house (abattoir) at Rudraram village. Patancheru Mandal, Medak District. Andhra Pradesh. within eight weeks from the date of receipt, of the report.
(Emphasis supplied).
9. It may be kept in mind that this order of the Division Bench by which certain directions were made by it to the State Government as well as to the Central Government was , however, not appealed before this Court. Pursuant to the directions given by the Division Bench in the aforesaid order, as noted herein above, the State Government constituted a Committee known as "Krishanan Committee" for examining and reporting the matters referred to in the order of the High Court. The Krishnan Committee constituted by the State Government submitted its report, It was noted in the report that some fundamentalist organizations opposed the establishment of the slaughter house on account of their religious and sentimental opposition to the slaughter of animals, whereas the Central Government and the Government of Andhra Pradesh permitted the setting up of this plant subject to the conditions imposed by them. So far as the pollution of air and water was concerned, the committee was of the opinion that if due observance of the safeguards stipulated by the several concerned departments, including Pollution Control Board was made by regular supervision, such pollution of air and water could be kept within a reasonable limit. So far as the depletion of the cattle wealth is concerned, the Committee upheld the objections of the Food and Agriculture Department in the following words:
There are valid reasons for believing that this argument, is substantially valid. To start with the capacity of the plant is so large that with the existing cattle wealth and possible increases thereto, will not be able to provide adequate input to this factory for more than a year or two unless drastic action is taken to increase the cattle wealth in the surrounding areas. The Food and Agriculture Department have already brought out the fact that the cattle wealth in the surrounding areas as also in the other parts of the State is gradually going down and the cattle available for slaughter is around 1,76 lakhs animals per year. As against, this, the existing slaughter houses in the State are already slaughtering animals to the extent of 2.01 lakhs, with the result that with the level of existing cattle wealth, there is no additional input likely to be available, to cater to the huge capacity of the plant being established at Rudraram. Food and Agriculture Department has also brought, out the fact that it will be difficult for the factory to adhere to the existing regulations of the provisions of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act and Prohibition of Cow Slaughter Act, 1977 and every effort: would be made to circumvent the provisions of this Act so that adequate input supply is maintained (for the?) factory. It was reported in the newspapers sometime ago that a similar factory established in Goa, after operation for one or two years had to drastically stop their operations for want of adequate input material.
10. After expressing the opinion, the Krishnan Committee made the following recommendation as a condition for allowing the establishment of the slaughter house:
In the circumstances it is essential to insist, on the Company to ensure that there is an effective programme to raise feed cattle 011 their own initiative for not less than 50% of the capacity so that the impact on the surrounding area is limited to this extent atleast. Further increases in capacity can he considered only if the company increases its own feed cattle. Eventually the Company will have to produce feed cattle for their entire extent of operations so as to minimise the impact on the existing cattle wealth.
If this alternative is not acceptable to the Company, the proposal mentioned by the Food and Agriculture Department of starting a modem abattoir with an investment of about Rs. 15 crores may be directed to take over this plant and eventually the unhygenic private slaughter houses in and around the city and government, slaughter houses can be closed and the meat, requirement, for the city may be met from this factory.
11. We have carefully examined the Report of the Krishnan Committee, and its recommendation for allowing the establishment, of the slaughter house. From a plain reading of the report and its recommendation, it cannot be doubted that the Krishnan Committee was in favour of the establishment of the slaughter house subject to the condition that it should raise its own cattle required by it - initially to the extent of half and ultimately to the full extent. The committee also opined that if the company was not willing to or not in a position to raise its "own cattle then the company may not to be allowed to run or its capacity may be utilised to meet the existing requirement by diverting the cattle from the existing slaughter houses. From this recommendation, it may be said that the existing slaughter houses, big and small, government and private, were to be closed down and the slaughter house of the company would be utilised to meet, the present domestic requirements. It also appears from the record that before forwarding this report to the Central Government, the Chief Secretary to the Government of Andhra Pradesh appended a Reference note which may not be required to be noted for our present purpose.
12. The report of the Krishnan committee was forwarded to the Central Government, The Central Government in its turn forwarded the report to the A.P.P.C.B. for appropriate action. However, no order was passed by the Central Government on the said report at all, although, the Central Government was a party to the order of the High Court, as noted herein earlier. That apart, the High Court also in its judgment as noted herein earlier, made certain directions to the Central Government to pass an order after considering the report.
13. A Writ Petition being W.P.No. 6704 of 1991 was filed by two environmentalists for issuance of a writ, restraining the Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board and others from supplying/selling water to the slaughter house of the company. An interim order was passed by the High Court on May 27, 1992 to the effect, that, the Hyderabad Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board and others be restrained from considering the proposals for sale of water to the company.
14. Dr. Kishan Rao appellant, in Civil Appeal No. 3966 of 1994 along with Ahimsa Trust filed a Writ Application being Writ Petition No. 8193 of 1992. In this writ petition an interim order was passed to the effect that the NOC granted by the APPCB shall be subject to further orders in the writ application.
15. Akhil Bharat Goseva Sangh which is appellant in Civil Appeal No. 3968 of 1994 filed a Writ Application No. 10454 of 1992 questioning the grant of permission for trial run of the slaughter house of the company.
16. A Writ Application being Writ Petition No. 13062 of 1992 was filed by Dr. Kishan Rao along with one Smt. Satyavani questioning the permissions granted for the establishment of the slaughter house of the company. As noted herein earlier, Writ Petition No. 8193/1992 was filed by Dr. Kishan Rao praying for similar reliefs which were prayed by him in Writ Petition No. 13062/1992. The Division Bench in the judgment under appeal had taken a serious objection to the filing of two Writ Petitions by Dr. Kishan Rao for similar reliefs and observed that there was mis-statement, on the part, of Dr. Kishan Rao saying that, relief claimed in Writ Petition No. 13062/1992 and reliefs claimed in Writ Petition No. 8193/ 1992 were different.
17. All these writ petitions were heard together and disposed of by the High Court by common judgment dated April 6, 1993. In the aforesaid judgment, the High Court in substance observed as follows:
(1) As the LOI granted by the Central Government and the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Preservation of Cow Slaughter and Animal Preservation Act, 1977 permits slaughtering of only useless cattle and in view of the fact that maintenance of such useless cattle involves a wasteful drain on the nation's meager cattle feed resources, the Government of Andhra Pradesh and the Central Government were fully justified in granting permission for establishing and running the slaughter house.
(2) In view of the agitations by some organizations the matter was re-examined and fresh discussions were made by different concerned departments of the State. On the question of slaughter policy of the State and on re-examination of the issues involved, the Director of Animal Husbandly observed on 21st December, 1990 that" the establishment of slaughter house would not really result in any depletion of cattle in the State.
(3) On 28.9.1991 the issue was again considered by me Director of Animal Husbandry, who reiterated his opinion expressed on 21.12.1990 which was also approved by the Andhra Pradesh Cabinet. in view of the aforesaid finding made by the Division Bench it was found by it that the establishment of slaughter house of the company would have only "negligible effect" on rate cattle growth in the State.
(4) So far as the environment aspects were concerned, Division Bench found that the safeguards stipulated by APPCB and other authorities of the State were sufficient to ensure control of air and water pollution.
18. Accordingly, the Division Bench was of the opinion that all the concerned authorities of the State having granted requisite permissions after duly considering all the relevant facts and circumstances, there-was 110 ground for intervening with the establishment and operation of the slaughter house. In the said judgment while dismissing the writ petitions, the Division Bench also directed prosecution of Dr. Kishan Rao for Ms mis-statement that he had not filed any other writ petition seeking similar reliefs.
19. We may restate that writ petition No. 10454 of 1992 filed by AKhil Bharat Goseva Sangh was also disposed of by the Division Bench on the same day. In Writ. Petition No. 10454 of 1992 the main contention of the petitioner was that the State Government had not complied with the directions made by the High Court in its judgment and order dated 16.11.1991 and in the said Writ Petition it was prayed that until and unless the State Government sent its report, in accordance with the direction of the Division Bench of the High Court, to the Central Government and the latter had taken decision thereon, the company be restrained from functioning. On this issue, the Division Bench held that this question was already dealt with in the judgment and therefore in this writ application there was no need to deal with it all over again, C.A.No. 3968 of 1994 was preferred against this judgment in this Court.
20. C.A. Nos. 3966, 3967 and 3968 of 1994 have been preferred against the judgment of the Division Bench of the A.P. High Court delivered on 6th April, 1993. The appellant in C.A. No. 3966 of 1994 is Dr. Kishan Rao, the appellant in C.A.No. 3967 of 1994 is Smt. Satyavani whereas the appellant in C.A. No. 3968 of 1994 is Akhil Bharat Goseva Sangh.
21. Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 1994 have "been directed against the order of another Division Bench allowing the writ appeal preferred by the company under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent, and setting aside the interlocutory order passed by a learned Single Judge in W.P.M.P. No. 9367/1993 arising out of W.P. No, 7483/1993, In this way the five appeals against the judgments of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh were placed before us for final disposal which were heard in presence of the learned Counsel for the parties.
22. By an order dated 25th October 1994 passed in C.A. No. 3968/1994 with C.A. Nos. 3964-3967/1994 Akhil Bharat Goseva Sangh v. State of A.P. and Ors. reported in MANU/SC/0924/1995 : 1994(4)SCALE721 , the report of the Krishnan Committee was taken into consideration by a Division Bench of this Court which made the following observations:
We are of the opinion that the rejection of Krishnan Committee report in the above manner really amounts to slurring over the main recommendation of the said report. Moreover, the learned Judges have not dealt with the failure of the Central Government to consider the said report and pass appropriate orders pursuant, to the directions of the High Court, in its judgment, dated November 16, 1991. The learned Judges have observed in the said judgment that it is not possible for the Court to go into conflicting reports of experts and that, therefore, they should leave the matter for the judgment, of the Government. This observation again does not lake into account the directions made by the said High Court in its judgment referred to above. They have also observed that the Director of Animal Husbandry has given his opinion or revised opinion, as the case may be, after taking into consideration the objections of the Food and Agriculture department. Though no material has been brought to our notice in support, of the said statement, we shall assume that it is so. Even then the fact remains that this reconsideration by Director, Animal Husbandry department is said to have taken place sometime in 1990. whereas even in 1992. the Food and Agriculture department was vet protesting with its views before the Krishnan Committee. Above all, the said reconsideration by the Director. Animal Husbandry department far prior to the judgment of the High Court dated November 16, 1991 does not relieve the Central Government of the obligation to consider the Krishnan Committee report and pass appropriate orders in the matter as directed by the judgment of the High Court dated November 16. 1901. It. was for the Central Government, to consider the said report taking into consideration the several facts and circumstances mentioned therein as also the contending views expressed by the several authorities and departments referred to therein. This, the Central Government has clearly failed to do.
There is another relevant consideration. The slaughter house has been in operation for the past eighteen months or so. It would be possible to find out the effect, if any of the operation of the slaughter house had on the cattle population of Medak and adjacent and nearby districts. It would equally be relevant to ascertain, if possible, what percentage of cattle slaughtered have been brought from other States and what percentage from the surrounding areas. In this connection, it is relevant to mention that the Animal Husbandry department has taken the total cattle population of the Andhra Pradesh State which is indeed misleading. The slaughter house is situated on the western border of Andhra Pradesh State, almost on the trijunction of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Karnataka. In such a situation, the slaughter house would rather draw its requirements of cattle from the surrounding and nearby districts rather that go all the way to far away districts of Andhra Pradesh State like Srikakulam, Visakhapatnam or for that matter, Nellore and Anantapur, which are situated several hundreds of miles away. The transport of cattle over long distance may induce the slaughter house to go in for cattle in the nearby areas, whether in Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra or Karnataka - unless, of course, the cattle are available at far cheaper rates at distant places, which together with transport charges would make it more economic for the slaughter house to bring cattle from far away districts or from tar away areas in the country. Therefore, taking the entire cattle population of the Andhra Pradesh State is bound to convey an incorrect picture. Perhaps, it would be more appropriate to take into consideration the cattle population of, what the Krishnan Committee calls, the "hinterland" of the slaughter house.
In view of the fact that the controversy relating to the establishment of the slaughter house has been going on over the last several years, we think it appropriate that the Central Government should look into all relevant, aspects, as directed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in its judgment dated November 16. 1991. forthwith and record its opinion before we take a final decision in the matter. The decision of the Central Government shall be recorded in a reasoned proceeding, which, shall be placed before this Court. The further orders to be passed would depend upon the contents of the report and the material so placed before us.
We may make it clear that, we should not, be understood to have expressed any opinion on the merits of the aspects which the Central Government has been directed to consider by the Andhra Pradesh High Court. Whatever we have said in this judgment is only to indicate the failure of the Central Government, to abide by the said directions and to record reasons in support of the direction made herein. We have also not gone into the other questions raised by the learned Counsel for the appellants. They can be considered at a later stage after the receipt of the material and the report from the Central Government.