MANU/SC/1567/2016
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 5881-5882, 5239-5240, 5342-5343, 5246, 5355, 5365, 5367, 5879 and 5956 of 2016
Decided On: 08.12.2016
Appellants: All India Power Engineer Federation and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Sasan Power Ltd. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Kurian Joseph and Rohinton Fali Nariman, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Jayant Bhushan, Kapil Sibal, J.J. Bhat, Chetan Sharma, Sanjay Sen, Sr. Advs., Purushaindra Kaurav, AAG, M.G. Ramachandran, K.V. Mohan, Ranjitha Ramachandran, Poorva Saigal, Anushree Bardhan, Shubham Arya, Nikunj Dayal, Pramod Dayal, Payal Dayal, Anand Ganeshan, Swapna Seshadri, Rajiv Kr. Shrivastava, Gargi Srivastava, Rakesh K. Sharma, Anuradha Mishra, G. Umapathy, Aditya Singh, Alok Shankar, Vikas Upadhyay, Sakya Singh Chaudhuri, Avijeet Kumar Lala, Anand Srivastava, Kush Chaturvedi, Mahesh Agarwal, Sadapurna Mukherjee, Navjot Singh, E.C. Agrawala, Rishabh Parikh, Saurabh Mishra, Dhan Raj, Matrugupta Mishra, Shikha Ohri, Hemant Singh, Divya Roy, Sitesh Mukherjee, Gautam Chawla, Akansha Tyagi, Sandeep Devashish Das, Rahul Dhawan and Udita Singh, Advs.
Subject: Electricity
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003 - Section 125
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 28, Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 29, Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 29(1), Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 29(2), Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 29(3), Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 61, Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 62, Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 63, Electricity Act, 2003 - Section 125; Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 1, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 62, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 63, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 148, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 152, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 163, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 171, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 174, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 176; Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 [Repealed];Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 [Repealed];Bengal Tenancy Act - Section 26F; CERC (Terms and Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2009;CERF (Tariff Regulations) 2009
Cases Referred:
Juggilal Kamlapat v. N.V. Internationale Crediet-En-Handels Vereeninging 'Rotterdam' MANU/WB/0013/1955 : AIR 1955 Cal 65; Morris v. Baron & Co. (1) 1918 Appeal Cases, 1; Official Assignee of Bombay v. Madholal Sindhu ILR 1948 (2) Bom 1; Chitguppi & Co. v. Vinaya Kashinath (1920) 45 Bom. 157 : S.C. 22 Bom L.R. 959; The Co-operative Hindustan Bank, Ltd. v. Surendranath De (1931) 59 Cal. 667; Jagad Bandhu Chatterjee v. Nilima Rani MANU/SC/0490/1969 : (1969) 3 SCC 445; Waman Shriniwas Kini v. Ratilal Bhagwandas & Co. MANU/SC/0171/1959 : 1959 Supp 2 SCR 217; P. Dasa Muni Reddy v. P. Appa Rao MANU/SC/0392/1974 : (1974) 2 SCC 725; Lachoo Mal v. Radhey Shyam MANU/SC/0715/1971 : (1971) 1 SCC 619; Indira Bai v. Nand Kishore MANU/SC/0250/1991 : (1990) 4 SCC 668; Krishna Bahadur v. Purna Theatre MANU/SC/0667/2004 : (2004) 8 SCC 229; Commissioner of Customs, Bombay v. Virgo Steels Bombay MANU/SC/0255/2002 : (2002) 4 SCC 316
Case Category:
COMPANY LAW, MRTP AND ALLIED MATTERS - MATTERS PERTAINING TO TRAI/SEBI/IDRAI AND RBI INCLUDING APPEALS U/S 18 OF TRAI ACT, INDIAN ELECT ACT 1910 AND 2003, ELECT SUPPLY ACT 1948 AND ELECT REFORMS COMMN ACT 1998
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 31.03.2016 of the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity, New Delhi in Appeal Nos. 233 and 266 of 2014
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Industry: Power and Energy
Citing Reference:


Affirmed
  1

Discussed
  5

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  5

Relied On
  1

Case Note:
Whether Appellate Tribunal was incorrect in accepting case of waiver put forward by Counsel for Sasan?

Held, a perusal of emails exchanged between parties would show that, parties did not intend to amend by a written agreement any of provisions of PPA. Whereas an amendment of PPA under Article 18.1 would be bilateral, a waiver of a provision of PPA would be unilateral under Article 18.3. If on facts, there is a waiver of a provision of PPA by one of the parties to PPA, then Section 63 of Contract Act will operate in order to give effect to such waiver. When waiver is spoken of in realm of contract, Section 63 of Contract Act governs. But waiver is an intentional relinquishment of a known right, and that, therefore, unless there is a clear intention to relinquish a right that is fully known to a party, a party cannot be said to waive it. If any element of public interest is involved and a waiver takes place by one of the parties to an agreement, such waiver will not be given effect to, if it is contrary to such public interest. Present case was covered by Section 63 of Electricity Act, which begins with a non obstante clause stating that notwithstanding anything contained in Section 62, appropriate Commission shall adopt tariff, if such tariff has been determined through a transparent process of bidding in accordance with guidelines issued by Central Government. Tariff was adopted by Commission only because competitive bidding process which had been undertaken was in accordance with guidelines so issued. Even if a waiver is claimed of some of provisions of PPA, such waiver, if it affects tariffs that are ultimately payable by consumer, would necessarily affect public interest and would have to pass muster of Commission under Sections 61 to 63 of Electricity Act. If at any subsequent point of time such tariff is increased, which increase is outside the four corners of PPA, even in cases covered by Section 63, the legislative intent and language of Sections 61 and 62 make it clear that, Commission alone can accept such amended tariff as it would impact consumer interest and therefore public interest. On facts in case, there was no waiver and Appellate Tribunal in coming to an opposite conclusion, was clearly erroneous. Thus, Appellate Tribunal was incorrect in accepting case of waiver put forward by Counsel for Sasan, and was equally incorrect in absolving independent engineer for test certificate given by him on 30th March, 2013. Therefore, Appellate Tribunal's judgment was set aside, and judgment of Central Electricity Regulatory Commission was reinstated. Appeals allowed.
JUDGMENT
Rohinton Fali Nariman, J.
1. These appeals have been argued over a number of days, but ultimately the points raised in them lie within a narrow compass.
2. On 19.1.2005, the Central Government, in exercise of powers Under Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 issued guidelines for a tariff based competitive bid process to be initiated by distribution licensees/procurers for procurement of power from generating companies. The electricity to be procured by such procurers is for the purpose of distribution and retail supply to consumers generally. On 10.2.2006, in pursuance of these guidelines, procurers in different States, namely, Appellants 1 to 3 and Respondents 5 to 15 (in Civil Appeal Nos. 5239-5240 of 2016) nominated Power Finance Corporation Limited, a Government of India undertaking as the Nodal Agency to complete a competitive bid process for development of an ultra mega power project based on linked coalmines using super critical technology of units of 660 mega watts (MW) each, plus or minus 20%, in Sasan District, Singrauli, Madhya Pradesh. On 10.2.2006, Sasan Power Limited was incorporated as a special purpose vehicle by Power Finance Corporation in order to implement the aforesaid purpose. On 1.8.2007, based on the competitive bidding process held by Power Finance Corporation, Reliance Power Limited, having quoted the lowest amount, was selected as the successful bidder, and a letter of intent was issued to Reliance Power Ltd. The quoted tariff, year by year, for a period of 25 years, which was accepted and incorporated as Schedule 11 in the Power Purchase Agreement dated 7.8.2007 (PPA) had tariffs at an extremely depressed rate for the first two years, after which the tariffs were fixed at a significantly higher rate. On the very day that the PPA was executed between Sasan Power Limited and the procurers for generation and sale of electricity, 100% share holding of the special purpose vehicle was acquired by Reliance Power Limited. The PPA contains detailed clauses with respect to generation of power and the tariffs payable for the period of 25 years. Apart from other provisions, we are really concerned with Article 6 read with Schedule 5 which provides for pre-conditions to be satisfied for declaration of a generating unit as Commercial Operation Date, "COD", namely readiness to commence commercial operations. This happens only when a performance test, by operating the generating unit at 95% of the contracted capacity as existing on the Effective Date on a continuous running basis for 72 hours, has been certified by an independent engineer, by giving a final test certificate to the aforesaid effect. The PPA also contains various other clauses which will be set out during the course of this judgment.
3. The bone of contention in these matters is whether the COD for Unit No. 3, which was the first Unit to be commissioned, had been achieved on 31.3.2013. If it had, then under Schedule 11 to the PPA, the entire first year would get exhausted in one day, i.e., 31st March being the end of the contract year, for which tariff payable would be at the rate of 69 paise per unit. If not, then it is only on and from the commencement of COD that such year would begin, which, according to the Appellants before us, would only begin on 16.8.2013 when a final test certificate in accordance with Article 6 of the PPA was given by the independent engineer to the effect that 95% of the contracted capacity had been achieved for a continuous period of 72 hours. We are informed that if the COD is said to be on 31.3.2013, as has been held by the Appellate Tribunal, the consumers would have to pay a sum of over ` 1000 crores, being the differential tariff that would apply.
4. The date for commissioning the first unit was fixed under the PPA as 7th May, 2013. However, under Schedule 11 thereof, this date was preponed to 27th November, 2012. As Sasan kept postponing this date, it appears that the commissioning tests for generating Unit No. 3 commenced from 20.3.2013. Various emails were exchanged from 27.3.2013 to 30.3.2013 between Sasan and the Western Region Load Dispatch Centre (hereinafter referred to as "the WRLDC"), a statutory authority under the Electricity Act, 2003. It is the case of Sasan that though they were ready to deliver electricity on 31.3.2013 at 95% of the contracted capacity of 620 MW of the unit, they could not do so as WRLDC did not give them the necessary green signal to go ahead. They relied heavily upon the independent engineer's test certificate dated 30.3.2013 to show that a COD took place on the following day, which we will consider in some detail later. At this stage, suffice it to say that a petition was filed by WRLDC before the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) on 25.4.2013, in which it was prayed:
1. Kindly look into the veracity of the certificate issued by the Independent Engineer in view of deliberate suppression and misrepresentation of the facts and issue suitable directions to Respondent No. 2 to desist from such act.
2. Kindly look into the matter of Respondent No. 1 including into intentional mis-declaration of parameters related to commercial mechanism in vogue and has purported to declare the part (de-rated) capacity of 101.38 MW as commercial on the grounds of load restriction by WRLDC and issued suitable directions in the matter.
3. Issue specific guidelines with respect to declaration of COD of the generators who are not governed by the CERC (Terms and Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2009 to be in line with CERC Regulations so that the same can be implemented in a dispute free manner and eliminate any possibility of gaming by generator.
4. Hon'ble Commission may give any further directions as deemed fit in the circumstances of the case.
5. This petition was allowed by the CERC by its order dated 8.8.2014, by which it first set out five issues as follows:
(a) Whether the petition filed by WRLDC is maintainable?
(b) Whether the Certificate issued by IE is in accordance with the PPA and if not, whether IE has made deliberate suppression or misrepresentation of facts while issuing the certificate?
(c) Whether COD of the station as declared by SPL is in accordance with the PPA?
(d) Whether the Respondent No. 1 has indulged in mis-declaration of parameters relating to commercial mechanism in vogue?
(e) Guidelines with regard to the commercial operation of a generating station which is not regulated by the tariff Regulations of the Commission.
6. The CERC answered issues (a), (b), (c), and (e) in the affirmative, and issue (d) in the negative. Ultimately the Commission arrived at the conclusion that COD had not been achieved on 31.3.2013 but had only been achieved later, on 16th August of the same year. This finding was set aside by the Appellate Tribunal by its judgment dated 31.3.2016, in which the Appellate Tribunal found that though COD had not been achieved on 31.3.2013 in accordance with the PPA, but that the procurers under the PPA had waived their right to demand performance at 95%, and that the performance of Unit No. 3, which was only roughly 17% of its contracted capacity, was accepted by all the procurers, and that therefore there was a waiver of this essential condition, which would then entitle the generator to treat 31.3.2013 as the date on which commercial operation of Unit No. 3 commenced. It is the correctness of this judgment which has been assailed by the various Appellants before us.
7. Mr. Jayant Bhushan, learned senior Counsel, Mr. Gopal Jain, learned senior Counsel, Mr. M.G. Ramachandran, learned Counsel, Mr. Purusha Indra Kavrar, learned AAG, and Mr. Alok Shankar, learned Counsel appearing for the Appellants have relied heavily on Article 6.3.1 read with Schedule 5 of the PPA, and stated that this is an Article which does not merely reflect the individual rights and liabilities of the generator and procurers of electricity but would also sound in public interest inasmuch as the declaration of COD would have effect on the tariff that is payable by consumers generally. They, therefore, argued that Article 6.3.1 cannot be waived as a matter of law. They also argued that it cannot also be waived as a matter of fact inasmuch as when the PPA expressly allowed a certain provision to be waived, it expressly stated so. In this regard, Articles 3.1.2, 4.4.2(b) 10.1(c), 10.2(c) were pointed out by them. Referring to Article 18.3 of the PPA, it was argued that the said Article is not a substantive provision for waiver, but only a provision dealing with the manner in which waiver is to be exercised, and has reference only to the aforesaid Articles. Further, even assuming that there was a waiver, such waiver took place as late as 15.4.2013 when the last communication from Uttarakhand Power was received. There was, therefore, no waiver of the aforesaid condition on 31.3.2013. They also argued that as a matter of fact the emails exchanged between the parties would show that the lead procurer and all the other procurers had in fact never consented to 31.3.2013 as being the COD for the purpose of the PPA. They also argued that really speaking any such alleged waiver was not a waiver at all, but an amendment to the PPA which would require the Commission's consent Under Article 18.1, inasmuch as it would affect the tariff payable by consumers. They also argued that it is clear from a reading of a chart which showed generation from March to August, 2013 that Sasan was not able to achieve anywhere near 95% of contracted capacity until 16th August which is when the COD took place on facts. They also pointed out that, for example, in the month of July, there was no supply of power at all by Sasan Power. Ultimately, it was stated that the Independent Engineer's certificate dated 30.3.2013 was a document made only to favour Sasan, so that Sasan could swallow one entire year of tariff in one day, so that the consumer would have to pay the higher tariff for what is in reality the first year, but is now being treated as the second year of generation and supply.
8. As against this, Shri Chidambaram and Shri Sibal, learned senior Counsel appearing on behalf of Sasan Power Ltd., have argued that as against 69 and 70 paise per unit for electricity supplied under the PPA, the procurers were in fact procuring electricity at much higher rates. It was the procurers themselves, therefore, who kept telling Sasan to supply power as soon as possible. For this, they relied, in particular, on the minutes of a meeting dated 27.2.2013 between the procurers and Sasan, in which the procurers unequivocally stated that any time upto 31.3.2013, the power generation should begin from Unit No. 3. This was because the moment such power generation began, whether it was 69 paise or 70 paise for the second year, the aforesaid tariff was much, much lower than what the procurers would have to pay otherwise. It was their argument that it was only at the behest of the procurers themselves that the COD was declared on 31.3.2013. They further argued that on a correct reading of emails and letters exchanged between the parties, the lead procurer and all other procurers had actually and unequivocally waived the requirement of 95% of contracted capacity demand and that the Appellate Tribunal was right in this behalf. Countering the arguments of the Appellant, they referred to and relied upon Section 63 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 to buttress their submission that waiver is a right granted by the Contract Act and does not depend upon the PPA. Therefore, whatever the construction of Article 18.3 of the PPA, it is clear that the Contract Act itself gives them this right which the procurers themselves have exercised in accordance with law, for the very good reason that they wanted the supply of cheap energy at any cost, even at the cost of being at 17% instead of 95% of contracted demand. It was also their case that they were ready to supply electricity on 31st March at 95% of the contracted demand, but unfortunately WRLDC prevented them from doing so, and that the independent engineer's certificate had been wrongly castigated by CERC, as was correctly held by the Appellate Tribunal. The independent engineer laid bare the facts correctly and therefore did not give a false or wrong certificate as was found by CERC. They also met an argument raised by the Appellant that Haryana at least had waived its right without prejudice to its other rights and contentions. This was met by stating that Haryana accounted only for roughly 12% of the total electricity demanded by all the procurers and that as per a Clause in the PPA, if the lead procurer and the other procurers constitute 65% or more, they can bind all the other procurers.
9. In order to appreciate the rival submissions, it is necessary to refer to the relevant provisions of the PPA, which reads as follows:
1. Definitions
The terms used in this Agreement, unless as defined below or repugnant to the context, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them by the Electricity Act, 2003 and the Rules or Regulations framed thereunder, including those issued/framed by Appropriate Commission (as defined hereunder), as amended or re-enacted from time to time.
The following terms when used in this Agreement shall have the respective meanings, as specified below:





6: Synchronization, Commissioning and Commercial Operation
6.1 Synchronisation
6.1.1 The Seller shall give the Procurers and RLDC at least sixty (60) days advance preliminary written notice and at least thirty (30) days advance final written notice, of the date on which it intends to synchronize a Unit to the Grid System, Provided that no Unit shall be synchronized prior to 36 months from NTP.
6.1.2 Subject to Article 6.1.1, a Unit may be synchronized by the Seller to the Grid System when it meets all connection conditions prescribed in any Grid Code then in effect and otherwise meets all other Indian legal requirements for synchronization to the Grid System.
6.2 Commissioning
6.2.1 The Seller shall be responsible for ensuring that each Unit is Commissioned in accordance with Schedule 5 at its own cost, risk and expense.
6.2.2 The Seller shall give all the Procurers and the Independent Engineer not less than ten (10) days prior written notice of Commissioning Test of each Unit.
6.2.3 The Seller (individually), the Procurers (jointly) and the Independent Engineer (individually) shall each designate qualified and authorized representatives to witness and monitor Commissioning Test of each Unit.
6.2.4 Testing and measuring procedures applied during each Commissioning Test shall be in accordance with the codes, practices and procedures mentioned in Schedule 5 of this Agreement.
6.2.5 Within five (5) days of a Commissioning Test, the Seller shall provide the Procurers (jointly) and the Independent Engineer with copies of the detailed Commissioning Test results. Within five (5) days of receipt of the Commissioning Test results, the Independent Engineer shall provide to the Procurers and the Seller in writing, his findings from the evaluation of Commissioning Test results, either in the form of Final Test Certificate certifying the matters specified in Article 6.3.1 or the reasons for non-issuance of Final Test Certificate.
6.3 Commercial Operation
6.3.1 A Unit shall be Commissioned on the day after the date when all the Procurers receive a Final Test Certificate of the Independent Engineer stating that:
a) the Commissioning Tests have been carried out in accordance with Schedule 5 and are acceptable to him; and
b) the results of the Performance Test show that the Unit's Tested Capacity, is not less than ninety five (95) percent of its Contracted Capacity as existing on the Effective Date.
6.3.2 If a Unit fails a Commissioning Test, the Seller may retake the relevant test, within a reasonable period after the end of the previous test, with three (3) day's prior written notice to the Procurers and the Independent Engineer. Provided however, the Procurers shall have a right to require deferment of any such re-tests for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days, without incurring any liability for such deferment, if the Procurers are unable to provide evacuation of power to be generated, due to reasons outside the reasonable control of the Procurers or due to inadequate demand in the Grid.
6.3.3 The Seller may retake the Performance Test by giving at least fifteen (15) days advance notice in writing to the Procurers, up to eight (8) times, during a period of one hundred and eighty (180) days ("Initial Performance Retest Period") from a Unit's COD in order to demonstrate an increased Tested Capacity over and above as provided in Article 6.3.1 (b). Provided however, the Procurers shall have a right to require deferment of any such re-tests for a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days, without incurring any liability for such deferment, if the Procurers are unable to provide evacuation of power to be generated, due to reasons outside the reasonable control of the Procurers or due to inadequate demand in the Grid.
6.3.4 (i) If a Unit's Tested Capacity after the most recent Performance Test mentioned in Article 6.3.3 has been conducted, is less than its Contracted Capacity as existing on the Effective Date, the Unit shall be de-rated with the following consequences in each case with effect from the date of completion of such most recent test:
a) the Unit's Contracted Capacity shall be reduced to its Tested Capacity, as existing at the most recent Performance Test referred to in Article 6.3.3 and Quoted Capacity Charges shall be paid with respect to such reduced Contracted Capacity;
b) The Quoted Non Escalable Capacity Charge (in Rs. /kwh) shall be reduced by the following in the event Tested Capacity is less than ninety five (95%) per cent of its Contracted Capacity as existing on the Effective Date: Rs. 0.25/kwh x [1 - {(Tested Capacity of all Commissioned Units + Contracted Capacity of all Units not Commissioned at the Effective Date)/Contracted Capacity of all Units at the Effective Date})
c) the Seller shall not be permitted to declare the Available Capacity of the Unit at a level greater than its Tested Capacity;
d) the Availability Factor of the derated Unit shall be calculated by reference to the reduced Contracted Capacity; and
e) the Capital Cost and each element of the Capital Structure Schedule shall be reduced in proportion to the reduction in the Contracted Capacity of the Power Station as a result of that de-rating (taking into account the Contracted Capacity of any Unit which has yet to be Commissioned).
(ii) If at the end of Initial Performance Retest Period or the date of the eighth Performance Test mentioned in Article 6.3.3, whichever is earlier, the Tested Capacity is less than the Contracted Capacity (as existing on the date of this Agreement), the consequences mentioned in Article 8.2.2 shall apply for a period of one year. Provided that such consequences shall apply with respect to the Tested Capacity existing at the end of Initial Performance Retest Period or the date of the eighth Performance Test mentioned in Article 6.3.3, whichever is earlier.
6.3.5 If a Unit's Tested Capacity as at the end of the Initial Performance Retest Period or the date of the eighth Performance Test mentioned in Article 6.3.3, whichever is earlier, is found to be more than it's Contracted Capacity as existing on the Effective Date, the Tested Capacity shall be deemed to be the Unit's Contracted Capacity if any Procurer/s agrees and intimates the same to the Seller within thirty (30) days of receipt of the results of the last Performance Test to purchase such excess Tested Capacity and also provide to the Seller additional Letter of Credit and Collateral Arrangement (if applicable) for payments in respect of such excess Tested Capacity agreed to be purchased by such Procurer/s. In case the Procurer/s decide not to purchase such excess Tested Capacity, the Seller shall be free to sell such excess Tested Capacity to any third party and the Unit's Contracted Capacity shall remain unchanged, notwithstanding that the Tested Capacity exceeded the Contracted Capacity.
Provided that in all the above events, the Seller shall be liable to obtain/maintain all the necessary consents (including Initial Consents), permits and approvals including those required under the environmental laws for generation of such excess Tested Capacity.
6.4 Costs Incurred.
The Seller expressly agrees that all costs incurred by him in synchronizing, connecting, Commissioning and/or Testing or Retesting a Unit shall be solely and completely to his account and the Procurer's or Procurers' liability shall not exceed the amount of the Energy Charges payable for such power output, as set out in Schedule 7.
18: Miscellaneous Provisions
18.1 Amendment
The Agreement may only be amended or supplemented by a written agreement between the Parties and after duly obtaining the approval of the Appropriate Commission, where necessary.
18.3. No Waiver
A valid waiver by a Party shall be in writing and executed by an authorized representative of that Party. Neither the failure by any Party to insist on the performance of the terms, conditions, and provisions of this Agreement nor time or other indulgence granted by any Party to the other Parties shall act as a waiver of such breach or acceptance of any variation or the relinquishment of any such right or any other right under this Agreement, which shall remain in full force and effect.
Schedule 5: Commissioning and Testing
1.1 Performance Test
i. (a) The Performance Test shall be conducted under any and all ambient conditions (temperature, humidity etc.) and any and all Fuel qualities that may exist during the time of the Performance Test and no corrections in final gross and net output of the Unit will be allowed as a result of prevailing ambient conditions or Fuel quality.
(b) The correction curves will only be used if the Grid System operation during the Performance Test exceeds Electrical System Limits.
(c) The Performance Test shall be deemed to have demonstrated the Contracted Capacity of the Unit under all designed conditions and therefore no adjustments shall be made on account of fuel quality or ambient conditions.
(d) The Seller shall perform in respect of each Unit a Performance Test, which such Unit shall be deemed to have passed if it operates continuously for seventy two consecutive hours at or above ninety five (95) percent of its Contracted Capacity as existing on the Effective Date and within the Electrical System Limits and the Functional Specifications.
ii. For the purposes of any Performance Test pursuant to this sub-article 1.1, the Electrical System Limits to be achieved shall be as follows:
(a) Voltage
The Unit must operate within the voltage levels described in the Functional Specification for the duration of the Performance Test. If, during the Performance Test, voltage tests cannot be performed due to Grid System, data supplied from tests of the generator step-up transformers and generators supplied by the manufacturers shall be used to establish the ability of the Unit to operate within the specified voltage limits.
(b) Grid System Frequency
The Unit shall operate within the Grid System frequency levels described in the Functional Specification for the duration of the Performance Test.
(c) Power Factor
The Unit shall operate within the power factor range described in the Functional Specification for the duration of the Performance Test. If, during the Performance Test, power factor tests cannot be performed due to the Grid System, data supplied from tests of the generators and the generator step-up transformers supplied by the manufacturers shall be used to establish the ability of the Unit to operate within the specified power factor range.
(d) Fuel quality and cooling water temperature
The Unit must operate to its Contracted Capacity with Fuel quality and water temperature available at the time of Testing and no adjustment shall be allowed for any variation in these parameters.
iii. As a part of the Performance Test, the Seller shall demonstrate that the Unit meets the Functional Specifications for Ramping rate as mentioned in Schedule 4. For this purpose, representative samples of ramp rates shall be taken, by ramping up or down the gross turbine load while maintaining the required temperature and temperature differences associated with each ramp rate within the turbine while maintaining all other operational parameters within equipment limits.
iv. Further, as a part of the Performance Test, the Unit shall be tested for compliance with parameters of Supercritical Technology.
1.2 Testing and Measurement procedures applied during Performance Test shall be in accordance with codes, practices or procedures as generally/normally applied for the Performance Tests.
1.3 The Seller shall comply with the prevalent Laws, Rules and Regulations as applicable to the provisions contained in this Schedule from time to time.
Schedule 11: Quoted Tariff
10. It is also necessary to set out the relevant provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003. Sections 28, 29, 61, 62 and 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003 read as under:
Section 28. Functions of Regional Load Despatch Centre:
(1) The Regional Load Despatch Centre shall be the apex body to ensure integrated operation of the power system in the concerned region.
(2) The Regional Load Despatch Centre shall comply with such principles, guidelines and methodologies in respect of the wheeling and optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity as the Central Commission may specify in the Grid Code.
(3) The Regional Load Despatch Centre shall -
(a) be responsible for optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity within the region, in accordance with the contracts entered into with the licensees or the generating companies operating in the region;
(b) monitor grid operations;
(c) keep accounts of quantity of electricity transmitted through the regional grid;
(d) exercise supervision and control over the inter-State transmission system; and
(e) be responsible for carrying out real time operations for grid control and despatch of electricity within the region through secure and economic operation of the regional grid in accordance with the Grid Standards and the Grid Code.
(4) The Regional Load Despatch Centre may levy and collect such fee and charges from the generating companies or licensees engaged in inter-State transmission of electricity as may be specified by the Central Commission.
Section 29. Compliance of directions: --- (1) The Regional Load Despatch Centre may give such directions and exercise such supervision and control as may be required for ensuring stability of grid operations and for achieving the maximum economy and efficiency in the operation of the power system in the region under its control.
(2) Every licensee, generating company, generating station, sub-station and any other person connected with the operation of the power system shall comply with the directions issued by the Regional Load Despatch Centres under Sub-section (1).
(3) All directions issued by the Regional Load Despatch Centres to any transmission licensee of State transmission lines or any other licensee of the State or generating company (other than those connected to inter State transmission system) or sub-station in the State shall be issued through the State Load Despatch Centre and the State Load Despatch Centres shall ensure that such directions are duly complied with the licensee or generating company or sub-station.
(4) The Regional Power Committee in the region may, from time to time, agree on matters concerning the stability and smooth operation of the integrated grid and economy and efficiency in the operation of the power system in that region.
(5) If any dispute arises with reference to the quality of electricity or safe, secure and integrated operation of the regional grid or in relation to any direction given under Sub-section (1), it shall be referred to the Central Commission for decision: Provided that pending the decision of the Central Commission, the directions of the Regional Load Despatch Centre shall be complied with by the State Load Despatch Centre or the licensee or the generating company, as the case may be.
(6) If any licensee, generating company or any other person fails to comply with the directions issued under Sub-section (2) or Sub-section (3), he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees fifteen lacs.
Section 61. Tariff Regulations: The Appropriate Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, specify the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided by the following, namely:
(a) the principles and methodologies specified by the Central Commission for determination of the tariff applicable to generating companies and transmission licensees;
(b) the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity are conducted on commercial principles;
(c) the factors which would encourage competition, efficiency, economical use of the resources, good performance and optimum investments;
(d) safeguarding of consumers' interest and at the same time, recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable manner;
(e) the principles rewarding efficiency in performance;
(f) multi year tariff principles;
(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity and also, reduces cross-subsidies in the manner specified by the Appropriate Commission;
(h) the promotion of co-generation and generation of electricity from renewable sources of energy;
(i) the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy:
Provided that the terms and conditions for determination of tariff under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 and the enactments specified in the Schedule as they stood immediately before the appointed date, shall continue to apply for a period of one year or until the terms and conditions for tariff are specified under this section, whichever is earlier.
Section 62. Determination of tariff: (1) The Appropriate Commission shall determine the tariff in accordance with the provisions of this Act for -
(a) supply of electricity by a generating company to a distribution licensee: Provided that the Appropriate Commission may, in case of shortage of supply of electricity, fix the minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff for sale or purchase of electricity in pursuance of an agreement, entered into between a generating company and a licensee or between licensees, for a period not exceeding one year to ensure reasonable prices of electricity;
(b) transmission of electricity;
(c) wheeling of electricity;
(d) retail sale of electricity:
Provided that in case of distribution of electricity in the same area by two or more distribution licensees, the Appropriate Commission may, for promoting competition among distribution licensees, fix only maximum ceiling of tariff for retail sale of electricity.
(2) The Appropriate Commission may require a licensee or a generating company to furnish separate details, as may be specified in respect of generation, transmission and distribution for determination of tariff.
(3) The Appropriate Commission shall not, while determining the tariff under this Act, show undue preference to any consumer of electricity but may differentiate according to the consumer's load factor, power factor, voltage, total consumption of electricity during any specified period or the time at which the supply is required or the geographical position of any area, the nature of supply and the purpose for which the supply is required.
(4) No tariff or part of any tariff may ordinarily be amended, more frequently than once in any financial year, except in respect of any changes expressly permitted under the terms of any fuel surcharge formula as may be specified.
(5) The Commission may require a licensee or a generating company to comply with such procedures as may be specified for calculating the expected revenues from the tariff and charges which he or it is permitted to recover. (6) If any licensee or a generating company recovers a price or charge exceeding the tariff determined under this section, the excess amount shall be recoverable by the person who has paid such price or charge along with interest equivalent to the bank rate without prejudice to any other liability incurred by the licensee.
Section 63. Determination of tariff by bidding process: Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 62, the Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff has been determined through transparent process of bidding in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government.
11. Since counsel for the opposing parties have made wide ranging arguments on the effect of Article 18 and waiver as a legal concept, it is important first to find out as to which pigeonhole the facts of the present case fit - whether the emails exchanged by the parties would amount to an "amendment" governed by Article 18.1, or whether it would amount to a "waiver" governed by Article 18.3.
12. A perusal of the emails exchanged between the parties would show that the parties did not intend to amend by a written agreement any of the provisions of the PPA. Whereas an amendment of the PPA Under Article 18.1 would be bilateral, a waiver of a provision of the PPA would be unilateral Under Article 18.3.
13. In order to better understand, conceptually, the difference between amendment and waiver, it is necessary to advert to Sections 1, 62 and 63 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
Section 1. Short title.-This Act may be called the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
Extent, Commencements.-It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir; and it shall come into force on the first day of September, 1872.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the provisions of any Statute, Act or Regulation not hereby expressly repealed, nor any usage or custom of trade, nor any incident of any contract, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
Section 62. Effect of novation, rescission, and alteration of contract.
If the parties to a contract agree to substitute a new contract for it, or to rescind or alter it, the original contract need not be performed.
Section 63. Promisee may dispense with or remit performance of promise.- Every promise may dispense with or remit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise made to him, or may extend the time for such performance, or may accept instead of it any satisfaction which he thinks fit.
14. Under Section 62, apart from novation of a contract and rescission of a contract, alteration of a contract is mentioned. Alteration is understood here, in the facts of the present case, in the sense of amendment. It is settled law that an amendment to a contract being in the nature of a modification of the terms of the contract must be read in and become a part of the original contract in order to amount to an alteration Under Section 62 of the Indian Contract Act. This is clear from Juggilal Kamlapat v. N.V. Internationale Crediet-En-Handels Vereeninging 'Rotterdam' MANU/WB/0013/1955 : AIR 1955 Cal 65 in paragraph 15 of which it is stated:
The effect of the alterations or arrangement; in the language of Viscount Haldane in Morris v. Baron & Co. (1) (1918 Appeal Cases, 1 at 17), "a new contract containing as an entirety the old terms together with and as modified by the new terms incorporated." The modifications are read into and become part and parcel of the original contract. The original terms also continue to be part of the contract and are not rescinded and/or superseded except in so far as they are inconsistent with the modifications. Those of the original terms which cannot make sense when read with the alterations must be rejected. In my view the arbitration Clause in this case is in no way inconsistent with the subsequent modifications and continues to subsist. [para 15]