MANU/SC/0853/1988
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 4250 and 4251 of 1986 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 12041 and 12090 of 1985]
Decided On: 11.12.1986
Appellants: Ambica Quarry Works and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: State of Gujarat and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Sabyasachi Mukherjee and K.N. Singh, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Gobind Das and S.H. Sheth, Sr. Advs., Hemantika Wahi and M.V. Goswami, Advs.
Subject: Commercial
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 141; Forest (conservation) Act, 1980 - Section 2
Relevant Section:
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 - Section 2
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Authorities Referred:
Craies On Statute Law, 7th Edition, page 229
Cases Referred:
State of Rajasthan v. Hari Shankar Rajendra Pal MANU/SC/0031/1965; Julius v. Lord Bishop of Oxford (1880) 5 AC 214; State of Bihar v. Banshi Ram Modi MANU/SC/0012/1985; State of Bihar v. Banshi Ram Modi, MANU/SC/0012/1985
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  3

Mentioned
  1

Case Note:

Environment - mining lease - Section 2 of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 - appellant applied for renewal of his mining lease and same was rejected - whether after coming of Act of 1980 appellants entitled to renewal of his lease - primary purpose of Act is to prevent further deforestation - renewal of lease lead to further deforestation - appellant not entitled to renewal of his lease.
JUDGMENT
Sabyasachi Mukherjee, J.
1. We grant leave in these two special leave applications and dispose of these appeals arising out of the decisions of the High Court of Gujarat by the judgment herein.
2. The two appeals center round the question of how to strike balance between the need of exploitation of the mineral resources lying hidden in the forests and the preservation of the ecological balance and to arrest the growing environmental deterioration and involve common questions of law. In the appeal arising out of special leave petition No. 12041 of 1985 the appellant firm had been granted a quarry lease for the minor mineral black trap at S. No. 73 of village Moral of Taluka Pardi in the District of Valsad in the State of Gujarat. The lease was granted on or about 8th November, 1971 for a period of ten years. The area comprised of 13 acres of land for quarrying purpose. Three persons were granted 2 1/2 acres of land each and the remaining 5 1/2 acres of land were placed at the disposal of Industries, Mines and Power Department for the purpose of granting quarry lease from the same. The case of the appellant was that the said lands were deserved from the forest area from 1971.
3. On or about 3rd August, 1981 when the appellant's term of lease was about to expire, the appellant applied for renewal of lease as per Rule 18 of Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966 (hereinafter called the said Rules). The application of the appellant for renewal of lease was rejected by the Assistant Collector, Valsad, on the ground that the land fell under the "Reserved Forest" area and hence the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (hereinafter called '1980 Act') applied to the forests. The forest, department of State of Gujarat refused to give 'no objection' certificate, The contention of the appellant was that by the order dated 29th November, 1971, the forest department had dereserved the said land from the reserved area and had allotted the land for the quarrying purpose to the appellant. The contention of the appellant was as the land was under the control of the Industries, Mines & Power Department, the 1980 Act did not apply to the same. An appeal was preferred by the appellant which was dismissed by the Director, Industries, Mines and Power Department, Government of Gujarat on or about 4th March, 1985.
4. It is asserted by the appellant that on or about 29th January, 1983, the Government had issued two circulars instructing the Director of Geology and Mining and other authorities not to issue the leases in the fresh area issued by the State Government. The appellant thereafter filed a writ petition in the High Court of Gujarat. The High Court of Gujarat dismissed the petition. The appellant has come up in appeal before this Court from the said decision. The appeal arising out of S.L.P. No. 12041 of 1985, hereinafter mentioned as first appeal.
5. The case of the appellants in the second appeal is that on diverse dates quarry leases had been granted to the said appellants. There were ten of them. Eight of the appellants got their first renewal of their quarry leases in 1976-77. Appellant No. 9 applied for first renewal on August, 1979. Appellant No. 6 applied for first renewal on 20th July, 1982. In 1982, some of the appellants except appellants 6 to 9 applied for second renewal to the Collector. In December, 1982, second renewals were refused by the Collector. Revision filed by the appellants against the order of the Collector was rejected by the Director, Geology and Mining in 1983 and in December, 1983, writ petition often described as special civil application was filed before the High Court, challenging the refusal to renew, The High Court rejected the said writ petition. The second appeal herein arises out of the said decision in August, 1985 of the High Court of Gujarat.
6. Both these appeals involve the question, whether after coming into operation of 1980 Act, the appellants were entitled to renewal either first or second of their quarry leases ? In this connection it is necessary to refer to the 1980 Act. This was an Act passed by the Parliament to provide for the conservation of forest and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto. The Statement of Objects of the said Act is relevant. It is stated that deforestation caused ecological imbalances and led to environmental deterioration. It recognised that deforestation had been taking place on a large scale in the country and it had thereby caused widespread concern. With a view to checking further deforestation, an Ordinance had been promulgated on 25th October, 1980. The Ordinance made the prior approval of the Central Government necessary for reservation of reserved forests and for the use of forest land for non-forest purposes. The Ordinance had also provided for the Constitution of an advisory committee to advise the Central Government with regard to grant of such approval. The 1980 Act replaced the said Ordinance. The Act extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and came into force on 25th October, 1980. Section 2 of the said Act is only relevant for our present purpose. It provides as follows:
2. Restriction on the dereservation of forests or use of forest land for non-forest purpose.- Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with the prior approval of the Central Government, any order directing-
(i) that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the expression "reserved forest" in any law for the time being in force in that State) or any portion thereof, shall cease to be reserved;
(ii) that any forest land or any portion thereof- may be used for any non-forest purpose.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section "non-forest purpose" means breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for any purpose other than reforestation.
7. The said section makes it obligatory for the State Government to obtain the permission of the Central Government for (!) dereservation of reserved forest and (2) for use of forest land for non-forest purposes. It is apparent, therefore, that the two dual situations were intended to be prevented by the legislation in question, namely dereservation of reserved forest, and use of forest land for non-forest purposes.
8. In the instant appeals leases for quarry purposes had been granted prior to the coming into operation of the Act in question. Shri Gobind Dass, learned Counsel for the appellant in the first appeal and Shri Seth learned Counsel for the appellants in the second appeal contended that there was no question of extending for non-forest purposes forest lands. There were existing quarry leases in one case first renewal was sought and in some other cases second or third renewals were being sought. Therefore these were at the relevant time dereserved forests, Neither of the two contingencies sought to be prevented was there. The conditions precedent for the operation of the Act were not there in the facts of these appeals, it was urged.
9. Our attention was drawn to Rule 18 of Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1.966 which were framed under the Act 67 of 1957 by the Government of Gujarat. The rules provide for the period of the lease, renewals and availability of areas already granted and sub-el. (b)(i) of the said Rule 18 of the said Rules provides as follows -.
(b)(i). - The lease for all minerals specified in Sub-clause (i) of Clause (a) may be renewed by the competent officer for one or more periods and the period of renewal at one time shall not exceed ten years and the total period for which the lease may be renewed shall not exceed twenty years in the aggregate.
10. Shri Seth drew our attention to Rule 3 of Part VIII (page 62) of the Manual which deals with the procedure of granting renewals under the rules.
11. On the other hand Shri Mehta, counsel for the respondents in the first appeal and Shri Poti, counsel for the respondents in the second appeal contended before us that after coming into operation of 1980 Act there was no question of renewal of the leases because this Act had prevented renewal of the lease without the approval of the Central Government.
12. Shri Govind Dass, however, placed strong reliance on State of Rajasthan v. Hari Shankar Rajendra Pal MANU/SC/0031/1965 : [1965]3SCR402 . That was a decision dealing with Rajasthan Mines Minerals Concession Rules, 1958. This Court in that case was concerned with Rule 30 under Chapter IV under the said Rajasthan Rules. This Court observed that the word 'may' in the proviso in Rule 30 in regard to the extension of the period by Government should be construed as 'shall' so as to make it incumbent on Government to extend the period of the lease if the lessee desired extension. The Rajasthan Rules provided, inter alia, as follows:
Period of lease - A mining lease may be granted for a period of 5 years unless the applicant himself desires a shorter period;
Provided that the period may be extended by the Government for another period not exceeding 5 years with option to the lessee for renewal for another equivalent period, in case the lessee guarantees investments in machinery, equipments and the like, at least to the tune of 20 times the value of annual dead-rent within 3 years from the grant of such extension. The value of the machinery, equipment and the like shall be determined by the Government. Where the lease is so renewed, the dead rent, and the surface rent shall be fixed by the Government within the limits given in the Second Schedule to these rules, and shall in no case exceed twice the original dead rent and surface rent respectively, and the royalty shall be charged at the rates in force at the time of renewal.