MANU/SC/0311/2015
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 8284 of 2013
Decided On: 20.03.2015
Appellants: Anirudh Kumar
Vs.
Respondent: Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
V. Gopala Gowda and C. Nagappan, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: H.P. Rawal, Sr. Adv., Anita Sahani, Divya Anand, Anando Mukherjee, Nipur Saxena and Purnima Bhat, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: L. Nageshwar Rao, ASG, K.K. Venugopal, Indu Malhotra, Sr. Advs., Kush Chaturvedi, Vikas Mehta, Nishtha Kumar, A. Bhumesh, Suman Yadav, Puneeth K.G., D.N. Goburdhan, Prabal Singh, Sanjiv Sen, Dev Roy, Praveen Swarup, Suresh Kumar, Rakesh Kumar, Yogendra Pal Singh, P. Kaushal and P. Parmeswaran, Advs.
Subject: Civil
Subject: Property
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 19(1)A; Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 2; Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 347; WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974 - Section 25
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 2, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 347, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 461; Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1986 - Section 25; Bonded Labour System Abolition Act, 1976; Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - Section 2; Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 2011; Constitution of India - Article 19(1)A, Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 32, Constitution of India - Article 226
Cases Referred:
S.P. Gupta and Ors. v. President of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0080/1981 : (1981) supp. SCC 87; State of Uttaranchal v. Balwant Singh Chaufal MANU/SC/0050/2010 : 2010(3) SCC 402; Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) v. Union of India; Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India; Fertilizer Corpn. Kamagar Union v. Union of India; Ramsharan Autyanuprasi v. Union of India; Gadde Venkateswara Rao v. State of A.P. MANU/SC/0020/1965 : AIR 1966 SCC 828; Calcutta Gas Co. (Proprietary) Ltd. v. State of West Bengal; Priyanka Estate International (P) Ltd. v. State of Assam (2010) 2 SCC 27; In Re: Noise Pollution (V) MANU/SC/0415/2005 : (2005) 5 SCC 733; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/8028/2006 : (2006) 3 SCC 399; ANZ Grindlays Bank v. Commr., MCD
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.01.2012 of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Letter Patent Appeal No. 857 of 2010 (MANU/DE/6318/2012)
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:

Affirmed
  3

Discussed
  3

Mentioned
  6

Case Note:
Delhi Development Act, 1957

Sections 347, 461 - Path lab--Regularisation Certificate--Violation of Master Plan--Quashing of--Regularisation Certificate was issued to the respondent-owners by the MCD under Mixed Land Use for running the Pathological Lab--MCD confirmed one-time parking charges of Rs. 9,35,673/- in terms of the Regularisation Certificate which had been paid by the respondent owners along with conversions charges --Regularisation Certificate is for running of a Pathological Lab--Conditions mentioned therein are directed towards running of a nursing home--There is a lot of inconsistency within the Regularisation Certificate itself and due to the same, the Regularisation Certificate cannot be accepted--It is impermissible not only in law but also because the same was granted without seeking permission from the High Court during the pendency of the earlier Writ Petition--Held, grant of the Regularisation Certificate with the alleged retrospective effect to run Nursing Home in favour of respondent-owners is quashed. [38] and [39]

JUDGMENT
V. Gopala Gowda, J.
1. This appeal by special leave arises out of the impugned judgment and order dated 16.01.2012 passed by the High Court of Delhi in LPA No. 857 of 2010 in and by which, the High Court, while dismissing the appeal held that this matter does not fall within its writ jurisdiction which requires determination by the High Court.
Brief facts which led to the filing of this appeal are as under:
2. The Appellant is residing on the second floor of D-1 Hauz Khas, New Delhi. Dr. Navin Dang and Dr. Manju Dang, the Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Respondent-owners') initially started a Pathological Lab in the name of 'Dr. Dang's Diagnostic Centre' in the year 1995 on the basement and ground floor of the concerned building and later on, in the year 2005-2006 the first floor of the premises was also purchased by them from its owner Mrs. Shanti Chatterjee whereby they expanded the activities of the Pathological Lab even to mezzanine floor and first floor by installing heavy medical equipments to make it fully equipped with the latest technology. When the Diagnostic Centre was started, it employed about 50 people and installed 25 Air Conditioners, two diesel generator sets of 25 KVA and 40 KVA each in the set-back area of the building along with kerosene oil tanks, gas cylinders and electric panels. There was a major parking problem in and around the vicinity of the Diagnostic center since a large number of patients visited the centre every day.
3. The Appellant made various complaints pertaining to the violation of the Master Plan to the concerned authorities', namely 1) Respondent No. 1-Dy. Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi (for shot 'the MCD'), 2) Respondent No. 2-SHO of the area, 3) Respondent No. 3-Executive Engineer, Delhi Electricity Supply Undertaking. As no heed was given to the same by the aforesaid Respondent, a writ petition No. 8808 of 2004 was filed by the Appellant before the High Court of Delhi. During the pendency of the said writ petition, contrary to the averments made by the MCD before the High Court that prosecution had been initiated against the responsible persons Under Sections 347/461 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the Regularisation Certificate was issued on 11.07.2006 to the Respondent-owners by the MCD under Mixed Land Use for running the Pathological Lab on the ground floor and first floor of the concerned building. Aggrieved by the grant of Regularisation Certificate, the Appellant withdrew the writ petition No. 8808 of 2004 and a fresh writ petition No. 225 of 2008 was filed by the Appellant before the High Court praying for quashing of the Regularisation Certificate wherein, the learned single Judge issued limited notice to the Respondents with respect to Clauses 3 and 7 of the Regularisation Certificate. The Learned single Judge rejected the challenge to the Regularisation Certificate issued on 11.07.2006 as the same was issued by MCD Under Clause 15.7.1 of the MPD 2021 approved by the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India which reads thus:
"15.7 OTHER ACTIVITY
15.7.1 Subject to the general conditions given in para 15.4 and additional conditions given in para 15.7.3, the following public and semi-public activities shall also be permitted in the residential plots abutting roads of minimum ROW prescribed in 15.7.2, whether or not the road is notified as Mixed Use street:
(a) Pre-primary school (including nursery/Montessori school, creche.)
(b) i. Nursing Home
ii. Clinic, Dispensary, Pathology lab and Diagnostic center.
.......................
Further, the learned single Judge vide order dated 5.10.2010 refused to decide the violation Under Clause 7 of the Regularisation Certificate on the ground that the petition is motivated by a private dispute than owing to any nuisance and hardship to any local resident as none of the other local residents had approached the Court with any complaint pertaining to nuisance.
4. The first Respondent-MCD confirmed that one-time parking charges of Rs. 9,35,673/- in terms of the Regularisation Certificate had been paid by the Respondent owners and that Respondent-owners had also deposited Rs. 8,39,916/- as conversions charges. The Appellant challenged the order dated 11.01.2008 issuing limited notice in writ petition No. 225 of 2008 passed by the learned single Judge by filing LPA No. 267 of 2009 before the Division Bench of the High Court and later on withdrew the same.
5. Aggrieved by the Order dated 5.10.2010 passed by learned single Judge, the Appellant filed LPA No. 857 of 2010 before the High Court praying for issuance of a writ of prohibition prohibiting the owners of the Pathological Lab from running the Diagnostic Centre in the concerned building, which was also dismissed by the High Court of Delhi vide its order dated 16.01.2012. Hence, this appeal by special leave is filed by the Appellant.
6. Heard Mr. H.P. Rawal, learned senior Counsel on behalf of the Appellant and Mr. K.K. Venugopal, and Ms. Indu Malhotra, learned senior Counsel on behalf of the Respondent-owners and Mr. L. Nageshwar Rao, Additional Solicitor General and other learned Counsel on behalf of the Respondent.
7. The learned senior Counsel on behalf of the Appellant contended that the Appellant made various complaints to the concerned authorities, namely, 1) Respondent No. 1-Dy. Commissioner, MCD regarding the commercial activity of the Respondents-owners. 2) Respondent No. 2-SHO of the area for forceful installation of the Generator sets in the set-back area of the concerned property and blocking the underground water tanks and 3) Respondent No. 3-Executive Engineer, Delhi Electricity Supply Undertaking about the installation of the Generator sets.
8. It is contended by the learned senior Counsel for the Appellant that the authorities were called upon by the Appellant to take some preventive action against the Respondent-owners as they have not taken any license or permission from the MCD prior to setting up of the Diagnostic Centre in the residential area which is admitted by the concerned Respondents themselves. According to the sanctioned building plan, the basement and the mezzanine floor could be used only for storage purpose and for no other purpose.
9. It is further contended by him that the MCD never sought permission of the High Court before issuing Regularisation Certificate in favour of the Respondent-owners when W.P. No. 8808 of 2004 was pending before the High Court. It is further contended by him that the said Regularisation Certificate dated 11.7.2006 which was allegedly granted under the MPD 2021 which could not have retrospective effect but in fact, is prospective in nature. Further it has been contended by him that the MPD 2021 was notified by the Ministry of Urban Development Vide Notification No. S.O. 141 and was brought into force on 07.02.2007. The said plan was only at its proposal stage, which fact was taken note of by the Division Bench of the High Court in its impugned judgment. Thus, it can be said that even before the MPD 2021 was brought into effect, the MCD went ahead with issuing Regularisation Certificate under the said plan in favour of the Respondent-owners of the Pathological Lab.
10. Further, it is submitted by the learned senior Counsel on behalf of the Appellant that on 27.04.2006, the complaint made by the 18 residents of the area to the Commissioner, MCD about the hardship and nuisance faced by them were not taken note of or given heed to by the authorities. Again on 24.07.2009, 32 residents of Hauz Khas complained to the ACP (Traffic) about the great hardship they have been facing due to the continuous nuisance being committed by the said Diagnostic and Pathological Lab.
11. It is further contended by the learned senior Counsel for the Appellant that no person shall, without the previous consent of Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC)-Respondent No. 5 herein shall establish or take any steps to establish any industry, operation or process or any treatment and disposal system or any extension or addition thereto which is likely to discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well or sewer or land. It is mandatory on the part of such establishment to first obtain consent from the DPCC for establishing or operating any industry, operation or process or any treatment and disposal system or any extension or addition thereto as envisaged Under Section 25 of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1986. Admittedly, no such consent was obtained or granted by the DPCC. The said fact has not been placed before the learned single Judge, Division Bench or this Court by any of the Respondents. The DPCC has stated in its counter statement that the Pathological Lab is being run by the Respondent-owners in the basement, ground floor, first floor and mezzanine floor of the concerned property. Thus, it is being run by them not only in violation of the Master Plan for Delhi 2001 but also MPD-2021.
12. It is further contended that the area illegally permitted by the MCD in pursuance of the alleged Regularisation Certificate dated 11.07.2006 mentions the area to be 222.25 sq meters and confines the activity of Respondent-owners to the ground floor and the first floor only. However, the Respondent-owners have been using the area much more in excess of the said permitted area by using the mezzanine floor of the building also. The said fact pleaded by the Appellant is corroborated by the inspection report submitted by the DPCC in these proceedings. It is further contended that the Respondent-owners have neither refuted nor pleaded anything contrary to the same, but on the other hand, for the first time before this Court, the learned senior Counsel on behalf of the Respondent-owners have stated that the mezzanine floor does not exist in the building. This plea urged by the Respondent-owners is not only contrary to the pleadings before the courts below but the same is made with a mala fide intention and is an incorrect statement of fact and therefore, requested this Court to reject the said contention.
13. Further, it is contended by the learned senior Counsel that the Appellant has been complaining about the set-back area of the building being illegally covered by the Respondent-owners contrary to the building bye-laws and for the first time before this Court, a new plea has been taken by the Respondent-owners that they have kept the generator sets in the set-back area of the building allegedly because they have not been allowed to install it on the terrace of the concerned building. This alleged fact is contrary to the facts and the title deeds of the property. The terrace in the building was purchased by the Appellant separately and he is the exclusive owner of the terrace.
14. It is further contended that the Appellant is living on the second floor of the building and enough damage has been done to the same and cracks have occurred therein due to the installation of heavy equipments including generator sets. The effect of such installation of such heavy equipments like generator sets on the terrace is not only dangerous but would also make it impossible for the Appellant as well as the surrounding neighboring residents to live peacefully.
15. It is further urged by the learned senior Counsel for the Appellant that the impugned order is liable to be set aside as the dispute between the parties is not a private dispute and Respondent Nos. 1 to 5 are required in law to take appropriate legal action against the Respondent-owners to stop the illegal and unauthorized activities in the concerned building. These activities of running the Pathological Lab are also contrary to Clause 7 of the conditions mentioned in the Regularisation Certificate dated 11.07.2006 issued by the MCD to the Respondent-owners for running of the Pathological Lab in the concerned building.
16. On the other hand, the learned senior Counsel on behalf of the Respondents have alleged that the Appellant himself has not approached this Court with clean hands and has deliberately suppressed material information and documents with a view to prejudice this Court against the answering Respondents and has raised unauthorized construction on the roof above the second floor of the concerned building. It is alleged by them that this appeal filed by the Appellant is motivated by personal animus against the answering Respondents. It is further contented that the contentions urged by the Appellant both in the writ petition and in this appeal do not raise any question of law or question of public importance, therefore, the same does not call for interference of this Court.
17. It is further contended by the learned senior Counsel for the Respondent-owners that the Delhi Master Plan 2001 classifies a Clinical Laboratory Under Section 2-Development Code, Clause 8(3) Sl. No. 077 as an activity permissible in a residential area. A clinical laboratory being a utility service is permitted to be run in both the residential and commercial areas and this facility must be easily accessible and in close proximity to people in residential zones.
18. Further, it is submitted by them that the MPD-2021 which came into force on 07.02.2007, provides for Mixed Use Regulations. Regulation 15.7.2 reads thus:
15.7.2 The minimum ROW of a street or stretch of road on which other activities are permissible is as follows:
In A & B Colonies: 18m ROW in regular plotted development; 1-3. Added vide S.O. 2034(E) dated 12-08-2008 184 Notes
......
In C & D colonies: 18m ROW in regular residential plotted development
.........
19. Further, it is submitted that as Hauz Khas area has been classified as a Class "B" Colony as per MPD 2021, the aforesaid activities of the Respondent-owners in the residential building are permissible in a Class "B" Colony, having an 18m ROW in regular plotted development. It is further contended that it is relevant to mention that there is no restriction with respect to the area that can be used for a Nursing Home, Clinic, Dispensary, Pathological Lab and Diagnostic Centre covered by Regulation 15.7.1 of the MPD 2021.
20. It is further submitted by the Respondent-owners in their written submissions that they have installed generator sets for running their Pathological Lab in the rear set back area of the concerned building, since the Appellant did not permit access to the roof of the second floor for utilities even though they have a right of access to the terrace to repair and clean the overhead tanks, to install TV antenna etc., under their registered sale deed of the building. Further, it is contended by the learned senior Counsel for the Respondent-owners of the Pathological Lab that they have not constructed any shed in the rear set-back area and generators have been kept in the sound-proof enclosures and the noise generated from them is within the permissible limits and therefore, there is no air and sound pollution in the area.
21. Further, it is contended by the learned senior Counsel for the Respondent-owners that Respondent No. 5, DPCC has given the permission to install the aforesaid generators in the building after conducting an inspection of the same and certified that the air quality standards are being complied with by them. Further, as advised by DPCC, the Respondent-owners have installed stacks above the height of the building but the Appellant broke the stack on several occasions, and thereby prevented the Respondent-owners from complying with the said directions. Ultimately, the Respondent-owners were constrained to construct a steel structure which is independent of the building, so as to ensure that the exhaust pipe of the generators is raised by 1.5. meters above the height of the building. It is further contended that the Respondent-owners have only one gas-cylinder connection in the Pathological Lab, which is used for making tea, coffee etc. for the Doctors and staff who are working in the lab, which cannot be termed as hazardous material as it is only used for domestic purposes.
22. We have heard the learned senior Counsel for both the parties and after considering the rival legal contentions urged by them, we have to answer each one of the rival legal contentions in seriatim by assigning the following reasons.
23. It is pertinent to note that during the pendency of this appeal, the parties have tried to reach an amicable settlement, however the same remained unsuccessful. Be as that may, this nature of ligation cannot be allowed to be settled between the parties as it involves public interest and violation of rule of law.
24. The writ petition was dismissed by the learned single Judge and the same was affirmed by the Division Bench in its impugned judgment and order on the question that the proceedings initiated by the Appellant are not in the nature of public interest but is only private interest litigation and therefore, the High Court had held that the writ does not lie against the Respondents. The said reasoning of the Division Bench in the impugned judgment is not acceptable to us based on the pleadings and documentary evidence produced before us as it is clear that several representations have been made by the affected neighbours of the building at different stages with regard to the nuisance created by the Pathological Lab right from 29.12.1995 till date including the complaint made by the 32 residents of Hauz Khas to the Assistant Commissioner of Police (Traffic) on 27.07.2009. The running of the Pathological Lab in the building by the Respondent-owners amount to violation of the rule of law and affects the public interest, therefore, it is public interest litigation even though the Appellant herein is a resident of the second floor of the concerned building and simultaneously he has been fighting for the cause of all the local residents. This legal principle has been laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of S.P. Gupta and Ors. v. President of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0080/1981 : (1981) supp. SCC 87, which legal principle has been reiterated recently by this Court in the case of State of Uttaranchal v. Balwant Singh Chaufal MANU/SC/0050/2010 : 2010(3) SCC 402 after adverting to the entire case law on the question of public interest litigation, the relevant paragraph from the decision of the S.P. Gupta case (supra) is extracted hereunder:
17. It may therefore now be taken as well established that where a legal wrong or a legal injury is caused to a person or to a determinate class of persons by reason of violation of any constitutional or legal right or any burden is imposed in contravention of any constitutional or legal provision or without authority of law or any such legal wrong or legal injury or illegal burden is threatened and such person or determinate class of persons is by reason of poverty, helplessness or disability or socially or economically disadvantaged position, unable to approach the court for relief, any member of the public can maintain an application for an appropriate direction, order or writ in the High Court Under Article 226 and in case of breach of any fundamental right of such person or determinate class of persons, in this Court Under Article 32