MANU/SC/0209/2019
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 436 of 2018 (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Decided On: 15.02.2019
Appellants: Anjali Bhardwaj and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.K. Sikri and S. Abdul Nazeer, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Pranav Sachdeva and Rahul Gupta, Advs. for Prashant Bhushan, Adv.
For Respondents/Defendant: Pinky Anand, Madhvi Diwan, ASGs, Pooja Dhar, Rajesh Ranjan, Arvind Kumar Sharma, Guntur Prabhakar, Prerna Singh, Prasenth Mathur, Madhumita Bhattacharjee, Urmila Kar Purkayastha, P. Venkat Reddy, Prashant Tyagi, Advs. for Venkat Palwai Law Associates, Hemantika Wahi, Jesal Wahi, Puja Singh, Vishakha, Parul Luthra, G. Prakash, Jishnu M.L., Priyanka Prakash, Beena Prakash, V.N. Raghupathy, Parikshit P. Angadi, Ravi Prakash Mehrotra, Ankit Agarwal, Deepa M. Kulkarni and Nishant Ramakantrao Katneshwarkar, Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Right to Information
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Constitution Of India - Article 32
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 3, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 4, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 4(1), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 4(3), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 4(4), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 5, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 6, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 7, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 7(8), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 8, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 8(1), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 9, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 10, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 11, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 12, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 12(3), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 12(5), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 13, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 13(5), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 14, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 15, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 15(2), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 15(3), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 15(4), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 15(5), Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 16, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 17, Right to Information Act, 2005 - Section 19; Constitution of India - Article 19, Constitution of India - Article 19(1), Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 32
Cases Referred:
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Raj Narain MANU/SC/0032/1975 : (1975) 4 SCC 428; S.P. Gupta v. President of India and Ors. (1981) Supp SCC 87; Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd. v. Proprietors of Indian Express Newspaper, Bombay Private Limited and Ors. MANU/SC/0412/1988 : (1988) 4 SCC 592; Union of India and Anr. v. Association of Democratic Reforms MANU/SC/0394/2002 : (2002) 5 SCC 294; Reserve Bank of India v. Jayantilal N. Mistry MANU/SC/1463/2015 : (2016) 3 SCC 525; Union of India v. Namit Sharma MANU/SC/0902/2013 : (2013) 10 SCC 359
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
Citing Reference:


Affirmed
  3

Relied On
  3

Case Note:
Right to information - Filling up vacancies - Information commissions - Petitioner prayed for issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing Union of India to take immediate steps to fill the vacancies in CIC by making appointment of 4 information commissioners in a transparent and time bound manner - Whether directions for effective implementation of RTI Act was to be issued.

Facts:

This writ petition is filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, as a Public Interest Litigation. The Petitioners state that it is filed with the aim to have effective implementation of the Right to Information Act, 2005 ('RTI Act') so that fundamental rights of citizens to access information from public authorities are secured. Under the RTI Act, the Central Information Commission ('CIC') and State Information Commissions ('SICs') have been created as statutory bodies to decide appeals and complaints against public authorities for non-compliance with the RTI law. On that basis, the Petitioners assert that it is essential to have proper functioning of these institutions for effective implementation of the RTI Act. As per the Petitioners, neither the Central Government in respect of CIC nor the State Government in respect of SICs, are filling the vacancies for the appointment of Commissioners in a timely manner. As a result the functioning of RTI Act is stifled. It is leading to huge backlogs of appeals and complaints in many Commissions across the country. The focus of the petition, thus, is to impress upon the respective governments to fill up such vacancies as and when they arise, without any delays. It is averred by the Petitioners in the petition that the RTI Act is a time-bound legislation and prescribes statutory timelines for providing the information. When that is not provided, or the applicant is aggrieved by the nature of response received, she/he is also entitled to file a first appeal with the designated First Appellate Authority. The First Appellate Authority is obligated to dispose of such an appeal within maximum period of 45 days. The reading of Sections 7 and 19 of the RTI Act makes it clear that the RTI Act is a time-bound legislation for effectively exercising the fundamental right to information guaranteed in Article 19 of the Constitution of India. However, the CIC and SICs which are the final appellate authorities under the RTI Act, and are the guardians of the Act are taking many months, and in some cases even years, to decide appeals and complaints due to accumulation of pending appeals/complaints. The main cause for such a delay is large number of vacancies in SICs across India.

Held, while disposing of the appeal

1. The right to information is not only a constitutional right of the citizens but there is now a legislation in the form of RTI Act which provides a legal regime for people to exercise their fundamental right to information and to access information from public authorities.[19]

2. There are various provisions in this RTI Act which are incorporated in order to ensure that right to information becomes a reality. It is a self-contained legislation, providing a comprehensive framework in this behalf. Under the RTI Act, Information Commissions have been set up at the Centre (CIC) and in all the States (SICs) to adjudicate on appeals and complaints of persons who have been unable to secure information in accordance with the RTI Act or are aggrieved by violations of the RTI Act. Chapter III titled, 'The Central Information Commission', containing Sections 12 to 14 of the RTI Act, lays down the provisions relating to the constitution of CIC, the term of office and conditions of service of the Chief and the Central Information Commissioners and the procedure and grounds for removal of Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners. Similarly, Chapter IV titled, 'The State Information Commission', containing Sections 15 to 17, lays down the provisions relating to the constitution of SICs, the term of office and conditions of service of the Chief and the State Information Commissioners and the procedure and grounds of removal of Chief Information Commissioner or State Information Commissioners.[20]

3. As per the RTI Act, the Commissions consist of the Chief Information Commissioner and upto 10 Information Commissioners, appointed by the President of India at the Central level and by the Governor in the States, on the recommendation of a Committee. In respect of CIC, such a provision is contained in Section 12 which stipulates that CIC shall consist of the Chief Information Commissioner and 'such number of Central Information Commissioners not exceeding 10 as may be deemed necessary'. Similar, provision for SIC is contained in Section 15(2) of the RTI Act. No doubt, there is a cap/upper limit of 10 Central Information Commissioners and State Information Commissioners in respect of each State respectively. Such number of CICs/SICs would depend upon the workload as the expression used is 'as may be deemed necessary'. The required number of CIC/SICs, therefore, would depend upon the workload in each of these Commissions.[21]

4. Insofar as provisions relating to eliciting the information from public authorities is concerned, the same is provided in Chapter II which comprises of Sections 3 to 11. Section 3 declares that all citizens shall have the right to information, of course, subject to the provisions of this Act. Section 4 puts an obligation on every public authority to provide information. In order to facilitate the right to information, various obligations are cast upon the public authorities under this Section. Perusal of Section 4 listing these obligations is itself a clear message that it is for the purpose of facilitating the right to information to the citizens.[22]

5. The RTI Act also provides in-house mechanism for giving information by these public authorities. For this purpose, each public authority is supposed to designate as many officers as Central Public Information Officers ('CPIOs') or State Public Information Officers ('SPIOs') who are supposed to provide information to persons requesting for the information under this Act. Timelines are set during which CPIOs/SPIOs are supposed to give the information, namely, within 30 days of the receipt of the request for obtaining information. Within this period either information is to be provided or request is to be rejected. Rejection can be only for a reason specified in Sections 8 and 9 of the Act. Sub-section (8) of Section 7 also casts an obligation upon the CPIOs or SPIOs to give reasons for such rejection. In the rejection order, applicant is also supposed to be informed about the period within which an appeal against such rejection may be preferred as well as particulars of the Appellate Authority.[23]

6. If the information is not provided and the request is rejected, appeal can be filed before the CIC or SICs as the case may be Under Section 19 of the Act. Apart from hearing the appeals, some more powers are also given to CIC or SICs and it is for this reason, in the entire scheme provided under the RTI Act, existence of these institutions becomes imperative and they are vital for the smooth working of the RTI Act. Of course, no specific period within which CIC or SICs are required to dispose of the appeals and complaints is fixed. However, going by the spirit of the provisions, giving outer limit of 30 days to the CPIOs/SPIOs to provide information or reject application with reasons, it is expected that CIC or SICs shall decide the appeals/complaints within shortest time possible, which should normally be few months from the date of service of complaint or appeal to the opposite side. In order to achieve this target, it is essential to have CIC/SCIC as well as adequate number of Information Commissioners. It necessarily follows therefrom that in case CIC does not have Chief Information Commissioner or other Commissioners with required strength, it may badly affect the functioning of the Act which may even amount to negating the very purpose for which this Act came into force. Same applies to SICs as well.[24]

7. It is in the aforesaid perspective that, the Petitioners state that occurrence of vacancies in Information Commissions, which are not filled up on time, is leading to huge backlogs and concomitant long waiting time for disposal of appeals/complaints. It is emphasised that the RTI Act is a time-bound legislation and prescribes statutory timelines for providing the information from the date of application (ordinarily 30 days). In case information is not granted, or the applicant is aggrieved by the nature of response received, she/he is also entitled to file a first appeal with the designated First Appellate Authority. The First Appellate Authority is obligated to dispose of such an appeal within maximum period of 45 days. The reading of Sections 7 and 19 of the RTI Act makes it clear that it is a time-bound legislation for effectively exercising the fundamental right to information guaranteed in Article 19 of the Constitution of India.[25]

8. However, the CIC and SICs which are the final appellate authorities under the RTI Act, and are the guardians of the Act are taking many months, and in some cases even years, to decide appeals and complaints due to accumulation of pending appeals/complaints because of a large number of vacancies in information commissions across India.[26]

9. The Petitioners refer to a report published in March, 2018 titled, 'Report Card on the Performance of Information commissions in India' found that 8 information commissions had a waiting time of more than one year for an appeal/complaint to be heard, which was calculated on the basis of the number of appeals and complaints pending as of October 31, 2017 and the monthly disposal rate. Further, several Information Commissions are functioning without a Chief Information Commissioner thereby undermining the autonomy of the Commission and hampering its smooth functioning including its ability to comply with the directions of this Court regarding the power of the Chief Information Commissioner to decide formation of special benches to hear matters involving complex questions of law. It is the grievance of the Petitioners that by not filling up vacancies in information commissions in a timely manner, the Central and State Governments are frustrating the very purpose of the RTI Act as receiving information in a time-bound manner is the essence of the law. In this way, argue the Petitioners, the fundamental right of citizens to access information from public authorities is being hindered by the non-appointment of commissioners in the CIC and various SICs across the country.[27]

10. Insofar as transparency in appointment of Information Commissioners is concerned, pursuant to the directions given by this Court, the Central Government is now placing all necessary information including issuance of the advertisement, receipt and applications, particulars of the applicants, composition of Selection Committee etc. on the website. All States shall also follow this system. Insofar as terms and conditions of appointment are concerned, no doubt, Section 13(5) of RTI Act states that the CIC and Information Commissioners shall be appointed on the same terms and conditions as applicable to the Chief Election Commissioner/Election Commissioner. At the same time, it would also be appropriate if the said terms and conditions on which such appointments are to be made are specifically stipulated in the advertisement and put on website as well. It would also be appropriate for the Search Committee to make the criteria for shortlisting the candidates, public, so that it is ensured that shortlisting is done on the basis of objective and rational criteria. Present Court also expect that Information Commissioners are appointed from other streams, as mentioned in the Act and the selection is not limited only to the Government employee/ex-government employee. It is directed that, persons of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in all the fields mentioned in Sections 12(5) and 15(5) of the Act, namely, law, science and technology, social service, management, journalism, mass media or administration and governance, be considered by the Committees Under Sections 12(3) and 15(3) of the Act for appointment as Chief Information Commissioner or Information Commissioners. It is directed that, the Committees under Sections 12(3) and 15(3) of the Act while making recommendations to the President or to the Governor, as the case may be, for appointment of Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners must mention against the name of each candidate recommended, the facts to indicate his eminence in public life, his knowledge in the particular field and his experience in the particular field and these facts must be accessible to the citizens as part of their right to information under the Act after the appointment is made. Respondents should to fill up vacancies, in future, without any delay.[67]

11. Directions are given keeping in view the salient purpose which RTI Act is supposed to serve. This Act is enacted not only to sub-serve and ensure freedom of speech. On proper implementation, it has the potential to bring about good governance which is an integral part of any vibrant democracy. Attaining good governance is also one of the visions of the Constitution. It also has vital connection with the development. All these aspects are highlighted above.[68]

12. The writ petition stands disposed of.[69]

Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
A.K. Sikri, J.
1. This writ petition is filed Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, as a Public Interest Litigation. The Petitioners state that it is filed with the aim to have effective implementation of the Right to Information Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as 'RTI Act') so that fundamental rights of citizens to access information from public authorities are secured. Under the RTI Act, the Central Information Commission (for short, 'CIC') and State Information Commissions (for short, 'SICs') have been created as statutory bodies to decide appeals and complaints against public authorities for non-compliance with the RTI law. On that basis, the Petitioners assert that it is essential to have proper functioning of these institutions for effective implementation of the RTI Act. As per the Petitioners, neither the Central Government in respect of CIC nor the State Government in respect of SICs, are filling the vacancies for the appointment of Commissioners in a timely manner. As a result the functioning of RTI Act is stifled. It is leading to huge backlogs of appeals and complaints in many Commissions across the country. The focus of the petition, thus, is to impress upon the respective governments to fill up such vacancies as and when they arise, without any delays.
2. It is averred by the Petitioners in the petition that the RTI Act is a time-bound legislation and prescribes statutory timelines for providing the information. When that is not provided, or the applicant is aggrieved by the nature of response received, she/he is also entitled to file a first appeal with the designated First Appellate Authority. The First Appellate Authority is obligated to dispose of such an appeal within maximum period of 45 days. The reading of Sections 7 and 19 of the RTI Act makes it clear that the RTI Act is a time-bound legislation for effectively exercising the fundamental right to information guaranteed in Article 19 of the Constitution of India. However, the CIC and SICs which are the final appellate authorities under the RTI Act, and are the guardians of the Act are taking many months, and in some cases even years, to decide appeals and complaints due to accumulation of pending appeals/complaints. The main cause for such a delay is large number of vacancies in SICs across India.
3. The petition points out that a report published in March, 2018 titled, 'Report Card on the Performance of Information Commissions in India' found that eight information commissions had a waiting time of more than one year for an appeal/complaint to be heard, which was calculated on the basis of the number of appeals and complaints pending as on October 31, 2017 and the monthly disposal rate. Further, several Information Commissioners thereby undermine the autonomy of the Commission which hampers its smooth functioning including its ability to comply with the directions of the Supreme Court regarding the power of the Chief Information Commissioner to decide formation of special benches to hear matters involving complex questions of law. By not filling up vacancies in information commissions in a timely manner, the Central and State Governments are frustrating the very purpose of the RTI Act as receiving information in a time-bound manner is the essence of the law.
4. Insofar as vacancy position and workload of CIC as well as SICs are concerned, the Petitioners have given the following information:
5. As on the date of filing of the petition, four posts of Information Commissioners were lying vacant in the CIC. More than 23500 appeals and complaints were pending as on April 04, 2018, before the CIC. However, no effective steps have been taken for filling up of the vacancies. Though, the Central Government had invited applications for the post of two Information Commissioners vide Circular dated 2nd September, 2016 in anticipation of vacancies occurring in December, 2016 and February, 2017, these vacancies have not been filled.
6. In respect of various SICs, the Petitioners have not only mentioned the backlog of the appeals and complaints pending therein, but also the vacancy position. It is further highlighted that though as per the RTI Act there has to be one Chief Information Commissioner and up to 10 Information Commissioners, most of the States have decided to have much lesser number of Commissioners, which again is affecting the workload. It is not necessary to give the details of such averments made in the petition as that would be taken note of while dealing with each SIC.
7. The Petitioners have also alleged that there is a lack of transparency in the appointment of Information Commissioners inasmuch as the Central Government as well as various State Governments have failed to adopt proper procedure to ensure transparency in the shortlisting, selection and appointment of Information Commissioners. This lack of transparency, according to the Petitioners, had led to filing of several cases in different courts challenging these appointments.
8. On the basis of averments of the aforesaid nature, the Petitioners have made the following prayers:
A. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the Union of India to take immediate steps to fill the vacancies in the CIC by making appointment of 4 information commissioners in a transparent and time bound manner.
B. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the State Governments of Maharashtra, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Nagaland, West Bengal, Kerala, Karnataka, Odisha and Telengana to take immediate steps to appoint Chief State Information Commissioners and Information Commissioners of the respective SICs in a transparent and time bound manner.
C. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the Union of India and all state governments to commence the selection process for information commissioners, including the Chief, at least three months prior to the occurrence of vacancy.
D. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the Union of India and all state governments to ensure that all records of deliberations and rational criteria related to short-listing and selection of the Chief Information Commissioner and other Information Commissioners be properly recorded and made available to citizens in consonance with the provisions of the RTI Act.
E. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the Union of India and all the State Governments to evolve an appropriate and transparent method of selection of Chief Information Commissioner and other Information Commissioners in consonance with the provisions of the Act.
F. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the Union of India and all state governments to ensure transparency in the selection process by:
a. Publishing advertisements to invite applications from eligible candidates.
b. Publicly disclosing, including through the website, the eligibility criteria for appointment as information commissioner/chief.
c. Publicly disclosing, including through the website, the procedure and rational criteria for shortlisting candidates, if any shortlisting is done.
d. Publicly disclosing, including through the website, the composition, mandate and minutes of meetings of the screening/search committee set up.
e. Publicly disclosing the names of short-listed candidates so that people can inform the selection committee any significant adverse information they may have about any such candidate.
G. Issue such other writ, direction or order, which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit under the facts and circumstances of the case.
9. In the petition, Union of India is arrayed as Respondent No. 1. Respondent Nos. 2 to 9 are the eight States, namely, States of West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Kerala, Odisha, Karnataka, Gujarat and Telengana. After the notice of this petition was served upon the Respondents, the Union of India as well as State Governments filed their response stating the position of pendency and also the steps taken for filling up of the posts. We shall take up the case of each of the Respondents separately, going by the ground realities in respect of each State. Before embarking on discussion qua each of these Respondents, it would be necessary to take note of certain provisions of the RTI Act and the significance thereof, as highlighted by this Court in various judgments.
10. Much before the enactment of RTI Act, which came on the statute book in the year 2005, this Court repeatedly emphasised the people's right to information to be a facet of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. It has been held that the right to information is a fundamental right and flows from Article 19(1)(a), which guarantees right to speech. This right has also been traced to Article 21 which concerns about right to life and liberty. There are umpteen number of judgments declaring that transparency is the key for functioning of a healthy democracy. In the matter of State of Uttar Pradesh v. Raj Narain MANU/SC/0032/1975 : (1975) 4 SCC 428, a Constitution Bench of this Court held that:
In a government of responsibility like ours, where all the agents of the public must be responsible for their conduct, there can but few secrets. The people of this country have a right to know every public act, everything, that is done in a public way, by their public functionaries. They are entitled to know the particulars of every public transaction in all its bearing. The right to know, which is derived from the concept of freedom of speech, though not absolute, is a factor which should make one wary, when secrecy is claimed for transactions which can, at any rate, have no repercussion on public security. To cover with veil secrecy the common routine business, is not in the interest of the public....