MANU/SC/1141/2017
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
I.A. No. 52448 of 2017 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 728 of 2015 (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Decided On: 12.09.2017
Appellants: Arjun Gopal and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.*
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Madan B. Lokur and Deepak Gupta, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Pooja Dhar and Zeeshan Diwan, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: Pinky Anand, ASG, Anil Grover, AAG, A.K. Sinha, C. Aryama Sundaram, P.S. Patwalia, Sr. Advs., Ajay Sharma, S. Wasim A. Qadri, D.N. Goburdhan, Amit Sharma, Saeed Qadri, Gurmeet Singh Makker, B. Krishna Prasad, R.K. Rathore, Kiran Bhardwaj, Ritesh Kumar, Binu Tamta, Vimla Sinha, B.V. Balaram Das, Rohini Musa, Sachin Mittal, Sagar Kothari, Mansi Bhatia, Prachi Goel, Rajiv Rekhani, Yoginder Handoo, Charu Wali Khanna, Chirag M. Shroff, Dharmendra Singh Pal, Sarla Chandra, V.D. Khanna, M.A. Chinnaswamy, C. Rubavathi, P. Raja Ram, V. Senthil Kumar, Advs. for Corporate Law Group, Anish R. Shah, Vijay Panjwani, Debojit Borkakati, M. Bala Shivudu, Piyush Hans, Satish Kumar, Sanjay Kumar Visen, Govind Narayan Kaushik, Kailash Chand, Advs. and Party-in-Person
Subject: Commercial
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Explosives Act, 1884 - Section 4, Explosives Act, 1884 - Section 5; Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; Delhi Police Act, 1978 - Section 146; Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 2(19), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 2(24), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 2(25), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 2(32), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 4, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 7, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 9(5), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 10(2), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 15, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 15(2), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 15(4), Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 75, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 84, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 99, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 48, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 106, Explosives Rules, 2008 - Rule 113; Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986;Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 32, Constitution of India - Article 38, Constitution of India - Article 39, Constitution of India - Article 41, Constitution of India - Article 42, Constitution of India - Article 43
Cases Referred:
Sadar Bazar Fire Works (Pucca Shop) Association v. Pankaj Traders and Ors. SLP (C) Nos. 17327-28/1993; Consumer Education & Research Centre v. Union of India MANU/SC/0175/1995 : (1995) 3 SCC 42; Occupational Health & Safety Assn. v. Union of India MANU/SC/0076/2014 : (2014) 3 SCC 547; Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union of India MANU/SC/0686/1996 : (1996) 5 SCC 647; Arjun Gopal v. Union of India MANU/SC/1652/2016 : (2017) 1 SCC 412
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  5

Mentioned
  1

Case Note:
Environment - Air pollution - Ban on fire works - Present petition filed seeking direction to ban use of fireworks, sparklers and minor explosives in any form, during festivals or otherwise - Whether or not bursting of fireworks was major cause of air pollution.

Facts:

Present petition filed seeking direction to ban the use of fireworks, sparklers and minor explosives in any form, during festivals or otherwise.

Held, while disposing off the petition:

(i) It could not be said with any great degree of certainty that the extremely poor quality of air in City was the result only of bursting fireworks around diwali. Certainly, there were other causes as well, but even so the contribution of the bursting of fireworks could not be glossed over. Unfortunately, neither was it possible to give an accurate or relative assessment of the contribution of the other identified factors nor the contribution of bursting fireworks to the poor air quality in City and in the National Capital Region (NCR). Consequently, a complete ban on the sale of fireworks would be an extreme step that might not be fully warranted by the facts available. There was, therefore, some justification for modifying the interim order passed earlier and lifting the suspension of the permanent licences. [69]

(ii) It could not be forgotten that admittedly there was a huge quantity of fireworks in City and in the NCR and the figure had been provided to by the Applicant. Similarly, there could be no doubt that the police had issued a large number of temporary licences and it would not be unreasonable to assume that around and during diwali, there would have been some illegal temporary shops set up, whether known or not known to the police. Therefore, there was a need to regulate the availability and sale of fireworks in City and the NCR. [70]

(iii) The directions issued by present Court in Sadar Bazar Fire Works (Pucca Shop) Association3 should stand partially modified to the extent that they were not in conformity with the Explosives Rules which should be implemented in full by the concerned authorities. Safety from fire hazards was one of concerns in this regard. Specifically, Rule 15 relating to marking on explosives and packages and Rule 84 relating to temporary shops for possession and sale of fireworks during festivals of the Explosives Rules should be strictly enforced. This should not be construed to mean that the other Rules need not be enforced-all Rules should be enforced. But if the fireworks did not conform to the requirements of Rules 15 and 84, they could not be sold in the NCR, including City and this prohibition was absolute. The directions issued and restrictions imposed in the order passed by present Court in Noise Pollution (V) shall continue to be in force. The concerned police Authorities and the District Magistrates would ensure that fireworks were not burst in silence zones that was, an area at least 100 meters away from hospitals, nursing homes, primary and district health-care centres, educational institutions, courts, religious places or any other area that may be declared as a silence zone by the concerned authorities. The police was directed to reduce the grant of temporary licences by about 50% of the number of licences granted in previous year. Similarly, the States in the NCR were restrained from granting more than 50% of the number of temporary licences granted in previous year. The area of distribution of the temporary licences was entirely for the authorities to decide. [71]
Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
Madan B. Lokur, J.
1. A large number of disparate prayers have been made in this public interest litigation initiated by the Petitioners Under Article 32 of the Constitution, but for the time being we are only concerned with the first prayer. This is to the effect that this Court may issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ or direction to ban the use of fireworks, sparklers and minor explosives in any form, during festivals or otherwise.
2. The public interest relief sought for is required to be considered from two perspectives: firstly, from preventing air pollution through the bursting of fireworks and secondly, by invoking the provisions of the Explosives Act, 1884 and the Explosives Rules, 2008 framed thereunder for preventing air pollution by restricting the possession and sale of fireworks in the National Capital Region.
Fireworks and air pollution in 2016
3. The prayer for a complete prohibition on the sale of fireworks due to pollution in the air caused by the bursting of fireworks was considered at an interim stage by this Court and a detailed order passed on 11th November, 20161. The manufacturers and suppliers of fireworks primarily based in Sivakasi (Tamil Nadu) moved an application on or about 5th July, 2017 for modification of that interim order. The modification application is registered as I.A. No. 52448 of 2017 and we now propose to decide that application.
4. The background for the interim order passed on 11th November, 2016 is that Diwali was celebrated in 2016 on 30th October. On the next day, it was discovered that PM2.5 levels in the air had crossed 700 æg/m3 being among the highest levels recorded in the world and about 29 times above the standards laid down by the World Health Organization (WHO). We need not delve into the details given in the order since there is no dispute that the air in Delhi and in most parts of the National Capital Region (NCR) was stiflingly polluted. This resulted in many falling sick and other having to purchase face masks for personal use and install air purifiers in buildings.
5. The conclusion that the air in the NCR and particularly in Delhi was polluted is not only based on the above information but is also based on the statutory standards or the National Ambient Air Quality Standards laid down in India. The standards are in Schedule VII of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986. Broadly stated the presence of PM2.5 should range between 40 and 60 μg/m3 and the presence of PM10 should range between 60 and 100 æg/m3. For the purposes of a lay person understanding this, it would be enough to say that air quality index or AQI is dependent on eight pollutants and the categorization based on the presence of these pollutants is as follows:
In Delhi, during November 2016 the AQI was way above 500 on several days and had even crossed 700 the day after Diwali. The standards laid down in Schedule VII of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 are as follows:
* Annual arithmetic mean of minimum 104 measurements in a year at a particular site taken twice a week 24 hourly at uniform intervals.
** 24 hourly or 08 hourly or 1 hourly monitored values, as applicable, shall be complied with 98% of the time in a year, 2% of the time, they may exceed the limits but not on two consecutive days of monitoring.
Notes.-Whenever and wherever monitoring results on two consecutive days of monitoring exceed the limits specified above for the respective category, it shall be considered adequate reason to institute regular or continuous monitoring and further investigations.
6. In the backdrop of these staggeringly high PM2.5 levels and other information provided by learned Counsel appearing for the parties, including damage to health by breathing in such highly polluted air, this Court directed the Union of India on 11th November, 2016 to:
(i) Suspend all such licences as permit sale of fireworks, wholesale and retail within the territory of the National Capital Region (NCR).
(ii) The suspension shall remain in force till further orders of this Court.
(iii) No such licences shall be granted or renewed till further orders.
7. The directions given by this Court have been implemented and are presently in operation. It was further directed that the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) will study and prepare a report on the harmful effects of the materials currently used in the manufacture of fireworks. The report was to be submitted to this Court within a period of three months. Notwithstanding the aforesaid order the CPCB has not furnished the report.
Application for modification of the interim order
8. Feeling aggrieved by the continuance of the interim order passed on 11th November, 2016 the concerned manufacturer and supplier of fireworks moved I.A. No. 52448 of 2017 for modification/vacation of the said order. The applicant was supported by other manufacturers and suppliers.
9. It is stated in the application for modification or vacation of the interim order that there are 821 fireworks industries situated in and around Sivakasi and they produce and supply fireworks and sparklers all over the country for festivals such as Diwali, Dussehra, Christmas, Ramzan and other important ceremonies. It is further stated that these industries directly employ about 2 lakh people and in addition, about 3 lakhs are employed in ancillary and subsidiary industries connected with the production and supply of fireworks.
10. According to the applicant the National Green Tribunal (NGT) rendered a decision on 10th November, 2016 in Original Application No. 21 of 2014 and other connected matters in which it is recorded that there are seven major contributors of air pollution in the NCR and these are:
1. Construction activity and carriage of construction material.
2. Burning of Municipal Solid Waste and other waste.
3. Burning of agriculture residue.
4. Vehicular Pollution.
5. Dust on the roads.
6. Industrial and power house emission including fly-ash.
7. Emissions from Hot-Mix Plants and Stone Crushers.
In other words, the submission of the applicant was that fireworks are not a major contributor of air pollution. We may, however, add that during the course of submissions, it was accepted by learned Counsel for all the parties that whether or not the bursting of fireworks is a major cause of air pollution in the NCR, it is certainly one of the causes of air pollution, particularly in Delhi.
11. The applicant also referred to and relied upon a study conducted by the Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur (IIT-K) in January 2016. The study is titled "Comprehensive Study on Air Pollution and Green House Gases in Delhi". The study was submitted in the form of a report to the Department of Environment of the Government of NCT of Delhi and the Delhi Pollution Control Committee. The study conducted by IIT-K suggests that the sources of PM2.5 are several but the bursting of fireworks is not one of them. We have not been informed whether any use has been made (if at all) of the study.
12. In addition to the aforesaid, the applicant also relied upon a view expressed by the CPCB before this Court to the effect that poor wind speed was one of the causes of smog over Delhi particularly in the winter months. It was also submitted that there are certain other geographical and meteorological conditions such as temperature, wind direction and boundary layer that contribute to the presence of smog in Delhi.
13. It was also submitted that the burning of crops or stubbles in Punjab and Pakistan also caused air pollution in Delhi and indeed this was the case in October-November 2016. A reference was made to a brief write up along with an image, released by the Earth Observatory of the National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA) and dated 2nd November, 2016, stating that, "Punjab ranks among the nation's top wheat and rice producers. For a few weeks in October and November, Punjab also becomes a major producer of air pollution." A reference was also made to a report in the New York Times by Geeta Anand on 2nd November, 2016 that an estimated 32 million tons of leftover straw from rice harvests were burnt in Punjab and Haryana, in spite of an NGT direction against this, and this led to plumes of smoke blackening the skies in the capital.
14. The applicant drew our attention to the poor air quality in Delhi on the days prior to Diwali 2016 and for more than a month thereafter. A comparison was drawn with the air quality recorded by the CPCB in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka and West Bengal to suggest that on some days prior to Diwali, the air quality was not particularly healthy in select cities in these States thereby suggesting that the air is generally polluted in different parts of the country and the bursting of fireworks may marginally add (if at all) to air pollution. In this context it was submitted that the bursting of fireworks takes place only for a couple of days around Diwali and other festive occasions and that cannot by itself result in a substantial deterioration in air quality all over the country including Delhi. The bursting of fireworks around Diwali would have only a temporary and transitory impact and not any long lasting effect. Therefore, the bursting of fireworks around Diwali does not explain high PM2.5 levels in Delhi more than even a month after Diwali.
15. During the course of submissions it was pointed out that the Delhi Pollution Control Committee had issued a direction on 8th November, 2016 under the provisions of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 banning the bursting of fireworks at all times except on religious occasions. It was submitted that this ban is still in force and therefore it cannot be said that the terrible quality of air in Delhi in November 2016 and thereafter is attributable only to bursting of fireworks-there are several other factors. It was submitted that on an overall consideration of the issues, the ban and sale of fireworks in Delhi and in the NCR should be modified if not lifted.
16. Learned Counsel for the Petitioners gave us a Note on the harmful and deleterious effects of some of the chemicals used in fireworks. We have no doubt and indeed no learned Counsel had any doubt that the excessive use of chemicals in fireworks could have serious and deleterious health effects, particularly among children. We are, therefore, proceeding on this basis without reference to the Note since there is no dispute on this aspect. With this agreement in mind (which has always been there), we had passed an order on 31st July, 2017 after hearing learned Counsel as well as Dr. A.B. Akolkar, Member Secretary of the CPCB and Mr. K. Sundershan, Deputy Chief Controller of Explosives, Sivakasi to the effect that fireworks manufactured by the Respondents shall not contain antimony, lithium, mercury, arsenic and lead in any form whatsoever. We had also directed that it would be the responsibility of PESO to ensure compliance particularly in Sivakasi. We had noted that there was some doubt about the health hazards that could be caused by the use of strontium in fireworks and adjourned the matter to hear submissions in that regard.
Steps taken to reduce air pollution
17. Learned Counsel for the parties drew our attention to certain steps that have been taken to curb air pollution in Delhi around the time of Diwali.
18. The Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization (PESO) had laid the foundation stone of the Fireworks Development Research Centre (FDRC) on 28th November, 2004. This is a specialized Centre which has been operating now for quite some time. The functions and activities of the Centre are the following:
1. Research & Development of eco friendly fireworks.
2. Testing of raw materials used in the manufacturing of fireworks.
3. Mechanisation of hazardous process in fireworks industry.
4. Testing of general performance and sound level of fireworks.
5. Rendering guidance for development of new products and standardization of general products.
6. Improvement of quality control and quality assurance.
7. Imparting training to supervisors and workers of fireworks factories.
8. Investigation of accidents.
19. It was brought to our notice that the FDRC has done some good work though related only to a few fireworks that are colloquially referred to as (a) Atom Bomb, (b) Chinese crackers (no reference to China at all), (c) Maroons and (d) Garland crackers. This study and research relates to the sound caused by the bursting of these fireworks and the light and colour emitted by them. No work has been done or study conducted at all with reference to pollution in the air caused by the bursting of these or other fireworks. We were informed (somewhat faintly) that this is really the job of the CPCB but the FDRC is willing to extend full cooperation to the CPCB in arriving at some definite standards.
20. It was also pointed out that this Court had passed an order on 18th July, 2005 in Noise Pollution (V), in Re. MANU/SC/0415/2005 : (2005) 5 SCC 733 to the following effect:
(i) Firecrackers
174. 1. On a comparison of the two systems i.e. the present system of evaluating firecrackers on the basis of noise levels, and the other where the firecrackers shall be evaluated on the basis of chemical composition, we feel that the latter method is more practical and workable in Indian circumstances. It shall be followed unless and until replaced by a better system.
2. The Department of Explosives (DOE) shall undertake necessary research activity for the purpose and come out with the chemical formulae for each type or category or class of firecrackers. DOE shall specify the proportion/composition as well as the maximum permissible weight of every chemical used in manufacturing firecrackers.
3. The Department of Explosives may divide the firecrackers into two categories-(i) sound-emitting firecrackers, and (ii) colour/light-emitting firecrackers.
4. There shall be a complete ban on bursting sound-emitting firecrackers between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. It is not necessary to impose restrictions as to time on bursting of colour/light-emitting firecrackers.
5. Every manufacturer shall on the box of each firecracker mention details of its chemical contents and that it satisfies the requirement as laid down by DOE. In case of a failure on the part of the manufacturer to mention the details or in cases where the contents of the box do not match the chemical formulae as stated on the box, the manufacturer may be held liable.
6. Firecrackers for the purpose of export may be manufactured bearing higher noise levels subject to the following conditions: (i) the manufacturer should be permitted to do so only when he has an export order with him and not otherwise; (ii) the noise levels for these firecrackers should conform to the noise standards prescribed in the country to which they are intended to be exported as per the export order; (iii) these firecrackers should have a different colour packing, from those intended to be sold in India; (iv) they must carry a declaration printed thereon something like "not for sale in India" or "only for export to country AB" and so on.