MANU/SC/0176/2011
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 115 of 2009 [Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India]
Decided On: 07.03.2011
Appellants: Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Markandey Katju and Gyan Sudha Misra, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: G.E. Vahanvati, Attorney General, T.R. Andhyarujina, Shekhar Naphade, Pallav Shishodia, Sr. Advs., Chinmoy Pradip Sharma, Soumik Ghosal, Shubhangi Tuli, Divya Jain, Vimal Chandra S. Dave, Sunaina Dutta, Suchitra Atul Chitale, Chinmoy Khaladkar, Sanjay V. Kharde and Asha Gopalan Nair, Advs.
Subject: Criminal
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 241(b); Constitution Of India - Article 115, Constitution Of India - Article 12, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 226(1), Constitution Of India - Article 32; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 302; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 304; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 306; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 309; Transplantation Of Human Organs And Tissues Act, 1994 - Section 2(d), Transplantation Of Human Organs And Tissues Act, 1994 - Section 3, Transplantation Of Human Organs And Tissues Act, 1994 - Section 3(6)
Relevant Section:
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 302; Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 304; TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN ORGANS AND TISSUES ACT, 1994 - Section 2; TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN ORGANS AND TISSUES ACT, 1994 - Section 3(6)
Cases Referred:
Vikram Deo Singh Tomar v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0572/1988 : 1988 (Supp) SCC 734; P. Rathinam v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0433/1994 : (1994) 3 SCC 394; Airedale v. Director MHD (1993) 2 WLR 316; Gonzalez v. Oregon; Baxter v. Montana; Sue Rodriguez v. British Columbia (Attorney General) (1993) 3 SCR 519; Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland (1993) All E.R. 82) (H.L.); S. v. McC. (Orse S.); M (D.S. Intervene) W v. W (1972) A.C. 24 43; Sidaway v. Board of Governors of the Bethlem Royal Hospital and the Maudsley Hospital (1985) AC 871, 882; Nancy B. v. Hotel Dieu de Quebec (1992) 86 D.L.R. (4th) 385; Superintendent of Belchertown State School v. Saikewicz (1977) 370 N.E. 2d. 417, 428; Reg. v. Cox; Washington v. Glucksberg 521 U.S. 702 (1997); Vacco v. Quill 521 U.S. 793 (1997); Cruzan v. Director, MDH 497 U.S. 261 (1990); Schloendorff v. Society of New York Hospital 211 N.Y. 125, 129-30, 105 N.E. 92, 93 (1914); Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0335/1996 : 1996 (2) SCC 648; Schmidt v. Pierce 344 S.W. 2d 120, 133 (Mo. 1961); Sanger v. Butler 101 S.W. 459, 462 : Tex. Civ. App. 1907; Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India MANU/SC/0285/1990 : (1990) 1 SCC 613; Heller v. DOE (509) US 312; State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas MANU/SC/0479/1975 : 1976 (1) SCR 906; Dwarka Nath v. ITO MANU/SC/0166/1965 : AIR 1966 SC 81; Shri Anadi Mukta Sadguru v. V.R. Rudani MANU/SC/0028/1989 : AIR 1989 SC 1607; In Re: F (1990) 2 AC 1; In Re: J (A Minor Wardship: Medical Treatment) 1990 (3) All E.R. 930; In Re: Quinlan 70 N.J.10 : 355 A. 2d 647; In Re: Conroy 98 NJ 321 : 486 A.2d 1209 (1985)
Authorities Referred:
Century Dictionary; "Words and Phrases" Permanent Edition, Vol. 33 at page 99
Disposition:
In Favour of State
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  21

Mentioned
  8

Case Note:
Constitution of India, 1950 - Article 32--Maintainability of petition--Held--Under Article 32 of Constitution petitioner has to prove violation of fundamental right--Right to life guaranteed by Article 21 of Constitution does not include the right to die--Petition is not maintainable.

"Brain Death"--Means complete absence of voluntary movements--This patient can only be maintained alive by advanced life support machine--These patients can be legally declared dead to allow their organs to be taken for donation.

"Coma" Patients--These patients are unconscious--They can not be awakened even by application of a painful stimules--They have normal heart beat and breathing and do not require advanced life support.

"Permanent vegetative stage"--In PVS complete absence of behavioral evidence for self or environmental awareness--They can not voluntarily control passing of urine and stools--They have normal heart beating and breathing--There is no threat to life and can survive for many years.

"Life--Scope of--Held--Life is not mere living in health and health is not the absence of illness but a glowing vitality.

"Withdrawal of life support"--Means and scope--Held--Withdrawal of life support by Doctor is in law, considered as an omission and not a positive steps to terminate life--Later would be euthanasia and a criminal offence.

"Active and Passive Euthanasia"--Held--Active euthanasia entails use of lethal substances or forces to kill a person while passive euthanasia entails with holding of medical treatment for discontinuance of life.

"Permanent Vegetative Stage"--Characteristic--Held--Distinguishing characteristic of PVS is that the brain stem remains alive and functioning while the cortex has lost its functions--So PVS patient Continues to breath unaided and his digestion continues to function--Though his eye are open but unable to see and hear.

Indian Penal Code, 1860--Section 309--Attempt to suicide--Legality--Held--Although Section 309 I.P.C. has been held to be constitutional valid but time has come when it should be deleted by parliament as it has become anachronistic--A person attempt to suicide in a depression and needs help.

"Withdrawal of Life Support" of PVS Patient--Requisite--Held--A decision has to be taken to discontinue life support either by the parents or spouse or other close relatives or in the absence of any of them such a decision can be taken even by a person or a body of persons acting as a next friend--It can also be taken by doctor attending the patient--Decision should be taken bona fide in the best interest of the patient.

Constitution of India, 1950--Article 226--Withdrawal of life support-Competent court--Held--It is the High Court under Article 226 of Constitution which can grant approval for withdrawal of life support to a competent person--High Court under Article 226 of Constitution is not only entitled to issue writ but is also entitled to issue directions and orders.

Application for "withdrawal of life support"--Procedure to be adopted--Held--When application for withdrawal of life support is filed than the Chief Justice of High Court should forth with constitute a Bench of two Judges who should decide to grant approval or not--Before doing so Bench should seek opinion of experts--For this purpose a panel of Doctors in every city be prepared.
Industry: Healthcare
JUDGMENT
Markandey Katju, J.
Marte hain aarzoo mein marne ki
Maut aati hai par nahin aati
1. Heard Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel for the Petitioner, learned Attorney General for India for the Union of India Mr. Vahanvati, Mr. T. R. Andhyarujina, learned Senior Counsel, whom we had appointed as amicus curiae, Mr. Pallav Sisodia, learned senior counsel for the Dean, KEM Hospital, Mumbai, and Mr. Chinmay Khaldkar, learned Counsel 3 for the State of Maharashtra.
2. Euthanasia is one of the most perplexing issues which the courts and legislatures all over the world are facing today. This Court, in this case, is facing the same issue, and we feel like a ship in an uncharted sea, seeking some guidance by the light thrown by the legislations and judicial pronouncements of foreign countries, as well as the submissions of learned Counsels before us. The case before us is a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, and has been filed on behalf of the Petitioner Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug by one Ms. Pinki Virani of Mumbai, claiming to be a next friend.
3. It is stated in the writ petition that the Petitioner Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug was a staff Nurse working in King Edward Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai. On the evening of 27th November, 1973 she was attacked by a sweeper in the hospital who wrapped a dog chain around her neck and yanked her back with it. He tried to rape her but finding that she was menstruating, he sodomized her. To immobilize her during this act he twisted the chain around her neck. The next day on 28th November, 1973 at 7.45 a.m. a cleaner found her lying on the floor with blood all over in an unconscious condition. It is alleged that due to strangulation by the dog chain the supply of oxygen to the brain stopped and the brain got damaged. It is alleged that the Neurologist in the Hospital found that she had plantars' extensor, which indicates damage to the cortex or some other part of the brain. She also had brain stem contusion injury with associated cervical cord injury. It is alleged at page 11 of the petition that 36 years have expired since the incident and now Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug is about 60 years of age. She is featherweight, and her brittle bones could break if her hand or leg are awkwardly caught, even accidentally, under her lighter body. She has stopped menstruating and her skin is now like papier mache' stretched over a skeleton. She is prone to bed sores. Her wrists are twisted inwards. Her teeth had decayed causing her immense pain. She can only be given mashed food, on which she survives. It is alleged that Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug is in a persistent negetative state (p.v.s.) and virtually a dead person and has no state of awareness, and her brain is virtually dead. She can neither see, nor hear anything nor can she express herself or communicate, in any manner whatsoever. Mashed food is put in her mouth, she is not able to chew or taste any food. She is not even aware that food has been put in her mouth. She is not able to swallow any liquid food, which shows that the food goes down on its own and not because of any effort on her part. The process of digestion goes on in this way as the mashed food passes through her system. However, Aruna is virtually a skeleton. Her excreta and the urine is discharged on the bed itself. Once in a while she is cleaned up but in a short while again she goes back into the same sub-human condition. Judged by any parameter, Aruna cannot be said to be a living person and it is only on account of mashed food which is put into her mouth that there is a facade of life which is totally devoid of any human element. It is alleged that there is not the slightest possibility of any improvement in her condition and her body lies on the bed in the KEM Hospital, Mumbai like a dead animal, and this has been the position for the last 36 years. The prayer of the Petitioner is that the Respondents be directed to stop feeding Aruna, and let her die peacefully.
4. We could have dismissed this petition on the short ground that under Article 32 of the Constitution of India (unlike Article 226) the Petitioner has to prove violation of a fundamental right, and it has been held by the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0335/1996 : 1996(2) SCC 648 (vide paragraphs 22 and 23) that the right to life guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution does not include the right to die. Hence the Petitioner has not shown violation of any of her fundamental rights. However, in view of the importance of the issues involved we decided to go deeper into the merits of the case.
5. Notice had been issued by this Court on 16.12.2009 to all the Respondents in this petition. A counter affidavit was earlier filed on behalf of the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, the Mumbai Municipal Corporation and the Dean, KEM Hospital by Dr. Amar Ramaji Pazare, Professor and Head in the said hospital, stating in paragraph 6 that Aruna accepts the food in normal course and responds by facial expressions. She responds to commands intermittently by making sounds. She makes sounds when she has to pass stool and urine which the nursing staff identifies and attends to by leading her to the toilet. Thus, there was some variance between the allegations in the writ petition and the counter affidavit of Dr. Pazare.
6. Since there was some variance in the allegation in the writ petition and the counter affidavit of Dr. Pazare, we, by our order dated 24 January, 2011 appointed a team of three very distinguished doctors of Mumbai to examine Aruna Shanbaug thoroughly and submit a report about her physical and mental condition. These three doctors were:
(1) Dr. J.V. Divatia, Professor and Head, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain at Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai;
(2) Dr. Roop Gursahani, Consultant Neurologist at P.D. Hinduja, Mumbai; and
(3) Dr. Nilesh Shah, Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry at Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Corporation Medical College and General Hospital.
7. In pursuance of our order dated 24th January, 2011, the team of three doctors above mentioned examined Aruna Shanbuag in KEM Hospital and has submitted us the following report:
Report of Examination of Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug Jointly prepared and signed by
1. Dr. J.V. Divatia (Professor and Head, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain, at Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai)
2. Dr. Roop Gursahani (Consultant Neurologist at P.D. Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai)
3. Dr. Nilesh Shah
(Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry at Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Corporation Medical College and General Hospital).
I. Background
As per the request of Hon. Justice Katju and Hon. Justice Mishra of the Supreme Court of India, Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug, a 60-year-old female patient was examined on 28th January 2011, morning and 3rd February 2011, in the side-room of ward-4, of the K. E. M. Hospital by the team of 3 doctors viz. Dr. J.V. Divatia (Professor and Head, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain at Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai), Dr. Roop Gursahani (Consultant Neurologist at P.D. Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai) and Dr. Nilesh Shah (Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry at Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Corporation Medical College and General Hospital).
This committee was set up because the Court found some variance between the allegations in the writ petition filed by Ms. Pinki Virani on behalf of Aruna Ramchandras Shanbaug and the counter affidavit of Dr. Pazare. This team of three doctors was appointed to examine Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug thoroughly and give a report to the Court about her physical and mental condition
It was felt by the team of doctors appointed by the Supreme Court that longitudinal case history and observations of last 37 years along with findings of examination will give a better, clear and comprehensive picture of the patient's condition.
This report is based on:
1. The longitudinal case history and observations obtained from the Dean and the medical and nursing staff of K. E. M. Hospital,
2. Case records (including nursing records) since January 2010
3. Findings of the physical, neurological and mental status examinations performed by the panel.
4. Investigations performed during the course of this assessment (Blood tests, CT head, Electroencephalogram)
II. Medical history
Medical history of Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug was obtained from the Dean, the Principal of the School of Nursing and the medical and nursing staff of ward-4 who has been looking after her.
It was learnt from the persons mentioned above that
1. Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug was admitted in the hospital after she was assaulted and strangulated by a sweeper of the hospital on November 27, 1973.
2. Though she survived, she never fully recovered from the trauma and brain damage resulting from the assault and strangulation.
3. Since last so many years she is in the same bed in the side-room of ward-4.
4. The hospital staff has provided her an excellent nursing care since then which included feeding her by mouth, bathing her and taking care of her toilet needs. The care was of such an exceptional nature that she has not developed a single bed-sore or fracture in spite of her bedridden state since 1973.
5. According to the history from them, though she is not very much aware of herself and her surrounding, she somehow recognizes the presence of people around her and expresses her like or dislike by making certain types of vocal sounds and by waving her hands in certain manners. She appears to be happy and smiles when she receives her favorite food items like fish and chicken soup. She accepts feed which she likes but may spit out food which she doesn't like. She was able to take oral feeds till 16th September 2010, when she developed a febrile illness, probably malaria. After that, her oral intake reduced and a feeding tube (Ryle's tube) was passed into her stomach via her nose. Since then she receives her major feeds by the Ryle's tube, and is only occasionally able to accept the oral liquids. Malaria has taken a toll in her physical condition but she is gradually recuperating from it.
6. Occasionally, when there are many people in the room she makes vocal sounds indicating distress. She calms down when people move out of her room. She also seems to enjoy the devotional songs and music which is played in her room and it has calming effect on her.
7. In an annual ritual, each and every batch of nursing students is introduced to Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug, and is told that "She was one of us"; "She was a very nice and efficient staff nurse but due to the mishap she is in this bed-ridden state".
8. The entire nursing staff member and other staff members have a very compassionate attitude towards Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug and they all very happily and willingly take care of her. They all are very proud of their achievement of taking such a good care of their bed-ridden colleague and feel very strongly that they want to continue to take care of her in the same manner till she succumbs naturally. They do not feel that Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug is living a painful and miserable life.
III. Examination
IIIa. Physical examination
She was conscious, unable to co-operate and appeared to be unaware of her surroundings.
Her body was lean and thin. She appeared neat and clean and lay curled up in the bed with movements of the left hand and made sounds, especially when many people were present in the room.
She was afebrile, pulse rate was 80/min, regular, and good volume. Her blood pressure recorded on the nursing charts was normal. Respiratory rate was 15/min, regular, with no signs of respiratory distress or breathlessness.
There was no pallor, cyanosis, clubbing or icterus. She was edentulous (no teeth).
Skin appeared to be generally in good condition, there were no bed sores, bruises or evidence of old healed bed sores. There were no skin signs suggestive of nutritional deficiency or dehydration.
Her wrists had developed severe contractures, and were fixed in acute flexion. Both knees had also developed contractures (right more than left).
A nasogastric feeding tube (Ryle's tube) was in situ. She was wearing diapers.
Abdominal, respiratory and cardiovascular examination was unremarkable.
IIIb. Neurological Examination
When examined she was conscious with eyes open wakefulness but without any apparent awareness (see Table 1 for detailed assessment of awareness). From the above examination, she has evidence of intact auditory, visual, somatic and motor primary neural pathways. However no definitive evidence for awareness of auditory, visual, somatic and motor stimuli was observed during our examinations.
There was no coherent response to verbal commands or to calling her name. She did not turn her head to the direction of sounds or voices. When roused she made non-specific unintelligible sounds ("uhhh, ahhh") loudly and continuously but was generally silent when undisturbed.
Menace reflex (blinking in response to hand movements in front of eyes) was present in both eyes and hemifields but brisker and more consistent on the left. Pupillary reaction was normal bilaterally. Fundi could not be seen since she closed her eyes tightly when this was attempted. At rest she seemed to maintain preferential gaze to the left but otherwise gaze was random and undirected (roving) though largely conjugate. Facial movements were symmetric. Gag reflex (movement of the palate in response to insertion of a tongue depressor in the throat) was present and she does not pool saliva. She could swallow both teaspoonfuls of water as well as a small quantity of mashed banana. She licked though not very completely sugar smeared on her lips, suggesting some tongue control.
She had flexion contractures of all limbs and seemed to be incapable of turning in bed spontaneously. There was what appeared to be minimal voluntary movement with the left upper limb (touching her wrist to the eye for instance, perhaps as an attempt to rub it). When examined/disturbed, she seemed to curl up even further in her flexed foetal position. Sensory examination was not possible but she did seem to find passive movement painful in all four limbs and moaned continuously during the examination. Deep tendon reflexes were difficult to elicit elsewhere but were present at the ankles. Plantars were withdrawal/extensor.
Thus neurologically she appears to be in a state of intact consciousness without awareness of self/environment. No cognitive or communication abilities could be discerned. Visual function if present is severely limited. Motor function is grossly impaired with quadriparesis.
IIIc. Mental Status Examination
1. Consciousness, General Appearance, Attitude and Behavior:
Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug was resting quietly in her bed, apparently listening to the devotional music, when we entered the room. Though, her body built is lean, she appeared to be well nourished and there were no signs of malnourishment. She appeared neat and clean. She has developed contractures at both the wrist joints and knee joints and so lied curled up in the bed with minimum restricted physical movements.
She was conscious but appeared to be unaware of herself and her surroundings. As soon as she realized the presence of some people in her room, she started making repetitive vocal sounds and moving her hands. This behavior subsided as we left the room. She did not have any involuntary movements. She did not demonstrate any catatonic, hostile or violent behavior.
Her eyes were wide open and from her behavior it appeared that she could see and hear us, as when one loudly called her name, she stopped making vocal sounds and hand movements for a while. She was unable to maintain sustained eye-to eye contact but when the hand was suddenly taken near her eyes, she was able to blink well.
When an attempt was made to feed her by mouth, she accepted a spoonful of water, some sugar and mashed banana. She also licked the sugar and banana paste sticking on her upper lips and swallowed it. Thus, at times she could cooperate when fed.
2. Mood and affect:
It was difficult to assess her mood as she was unable to communicate or express her feelings. She appeared to calm down when she was touched or caressed gently. She did not cry or laugh or expressed any other emotions verbally or non-verbally during the examination period. When not disturbed and observed quietly from a distance, she did not appear to be in severe pain or misery. Only when many people enter her room, she appears to get a bit disturbed about it.
3. Speech and thoughts:
She could make repeated vocal sounds but she could not utter or repeat any comprehensible words or follow and respond to any of the simple commands (such as "show me your tongue"). The only way she expressed herself was by making some sounds. She appeared to have minimal language comprehension or expression.
4. Perception:
She did not appear to be having any perceptual abnormality like hallucinations or illusions from her behavior.
5. Orientation, memory and intellectual capacity:
Formal assessment of orientation in time, place and person, memory of immediate, recent and remote events and her intellectual capacity could not be carried out.
6. Insight:
As she does not appear to be fully aware of herself and her surroundings, she is unlikely to have any insight into her illness.
IV. Reports of Investigations
IVa. CT Scan Head (Plain)
This is contaminated by movement artefacts. It shows generalized prominence of supratentorial sulci and ventricles suggestive of generalized cerebral atrophy. Brainstem and cerebellum seem normal. Ischemic foci are seen in left centrum semi-ovale and right external capsule. In addition a small left parieto-occipital cortical lesion is also seen and is probably ischemic.
I Vb. EEG
The dominant feature is a moderately rhythmic alpha frequency at 8-10 Hz and 20-70 microvolts which is widely distributed and is equally prominent both anteriorly and posteriorly. It is not responsive to eye-opening as seen on the video. Beta at 18-25 Hz is also seen diffusely but more prominently anteriorly. No focal or paroxysmal abnormalities were noted
IVc. Blood
Reports of the hemoglobin, white cell count, liver function tests, renal function tests, electrolytes, thyroid function, Vitamin B12 and 1,25 dihydroxy Vit D3 levels are unremarkable. (Detailed report from KEM hospital attached.)
V. Diagnostic impression
1) From the longitudinal case history and examination it appears that Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug has developed non-progressive but irreversible brain damage secondary to hypoxic-ischemic brain injury consistent with the known effects of strangulation. Most authorities consider a period exceeding 4 weeks in this condition, especially when due to hypoxic-ischemic injury as confirming irreversibility. In Ms. Aruna's case, this period has been as long as 37 years, making her perhaps the longest survivor in this situation.
2) She meets most of the criteria for being in a permanent vegetative state (PVS). PVS is defined as a clinical condition of unawareness (Table 1) of self and environment in which the patient breathes spontaneously, has a stable circulation and shows cycles of eye closure and opening which may simulate sleep and waking (Table 2). While she has evidence of intact auditory, visual, somatic and motor primary neural pathways, no definitive evidence for awareness of auditory, visual, somatic and motor stimuli was observed during our examinations.
VI. Prognosis
Her dementia has not progressed and has remained stable for last many years and it is likely to remain same over next many years. At present there is no treatment available for the brain damage she has sustained.
VII. Appendix
VII (a) Table 1. CLINICAL ASSESSMENT TO ESTABLISH UNAWARENESS
(Wade DT, Johnston C. British Med Journal 1999; 319:841-844)
Domain Observed
Stimulus
Response
Auditory Awareness
Sudden loud noise (clap)
Startle present, ceases other movements
Meaningful noise (rattled steel tumbler and spoon, film songs of 1970s)
Non-specific head and body movements
Spoken commands ("close your eyes", "lift left hand ": in English, Marathi and Konkani)
Unable to obey commands.
  No specific or reproducible response
Visual Awareness
Bright light to eyes
Papillary responses present
Large moving object in front of eyes (bright red torch rattle)
Tracking movements: present but inconsistent and poorly reproducible
Visual threat (fingers suddenly moved toward eyes)
Blinks, but more consistent on left than right
Written command (English, Marathi: close your eyes)
No response
Somatic Awareness
Painful stimuli to limbs (light prick with sharp end of tendon hammer)
Withdrawal, maximal in left upper limb
Painful stimuli to face
Distress but no coordinated response to remove stimulus
Routine sensory stimuli during care (changing position in bed and feeding) Generalized
Generalized non specific response presence but no coordinated attempt to assist in process
Motor Output
Spontaneous
Non-specific undirected activities. Goal directed - lifting left hand to left side of face, apparently to rub her left eye.
Responsive
Non-specific undirected without any goal directed activities
Conclusion:
From the above examination, she has evidence of intact auditory, visual, somatic and motor primary neural pathways. However no definitive evidence for awareness of auditory, visual, somatic and motor stimuli was observed during our examinations.
VII (b) Table 2. Application of Criteria for Vegetative State
(Bernat JL. Neurology clinical Practice 2010; 75 (suppl. 1):S33-S38)
Criteria
Examination findings: whether she meets Criteria (Yes/No/Probably)
Unaware of self and environment
Yes, Unaware
No interaction with others
Yes, no interaction
No sustained, reproducible or purposeful voluntary behavioural response to visual, auditory, tactile or noxious stimuli
Yes, no sustained, reproducible or purposeful behavioural response, but:
(1) Resisted examination of fundus
(2) Licked sugar off lips
No language comprehension
Yes, no comprehension expression
No blink to visual threat
Blinks, but more consistent on left than right
Present sleep wake cycles
Yes (according to nurses)
Preserved autonomic and hypothalamic function
Yes
Preserved cranial nerve reflexes
Yes
Bowel and bladder incontinence
Yes
VIII. References
1. Multi-Society Task Force on PVS. Medical aspects of the persistent vegetative state. NEngl J Med 1994; 330: 1499-508
2. Wade DT, Johnston C. The permanent vegetative state: practical guidance on diagnosis and management. Brit Med J 1999; 319:841-4
3. Giacino JT, Ashwal S, Childs N, et al. The minimally conscious state : Definition and diagnostic criteria. Neurology 2002;58:349-353
4. Bernat JL. Current controversies in states of chronic unconsciousness. Neurology 2010;75;S33
8. On 18th February, 2011, we then passed the following order:
In the above case Dr. J.V. Divatia on 17.02.2011 handed over the report of the team of three doctors whom we had appointed by our order dated 24th January, 2011. He has also handed over a CD in this connection. Let the report as well as the CD form part of the record.
On mentioning, the case has been adjourned to be listed on 2nd March, 2011 at the request of learned Attorney General of India, Mr. T.R. Andhyarujina, learned Senior Advocate, whom we have appointed as amicus curiae in the case as well as Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned Senior Advocate for the Petitioner.
We request the doctors whom we had appointed viz., Dr. J.V. Divatia, Dr. Roop Gurshani and Dr. Nilesh Shah to appear before us on 2nd March, 2011 at 10.30 A.M. in the Court, since it is quite possible that we may like to ask them questions about the report which they have submitted, and in general about their views in connection with euthanasia.
On perusal of the report of the committee of doctors to us we have noted that there are many technical terms which have been used therein which a non-medical man would find it difficult to understand. We, therefore, request the doctors to submit a supplementary report by the next date of hearing (by e-mailing copy of the same two days before the next date of hearing) in which the meaning of these technical terms in the report is also explained.
The Central Government is directed to arrange for the air travel expenses of all the three doctors as well as their stay in a suitable accommodation at Delhi and also to provide them necessary conveyance and other facilities they require, so that they can appear before us on 02.03.2011.
An honorarium may also be given to the doctors, if they so desire, which may be arranged mutually with the learned Attorney General.
The Dean of King Edward Memorial Hospital as well as Ms. Pinky Virani (who claims to be the next friend of the Petitioner) are directed to intimate the brother(s)/sister(s) or other close relatives of the Petitioner that the case will be listed on 2nd March, 2011 in the Supreme Court and they can put forward their views before the Court, if they so desire. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner and the Registry of this Court shall communicate a copy of this Order forthwith to the Dean, KEM Hospital. The Dean, KEM Hospital is requested to file an affidavit stating his views regarding the prayer in this writ petition, and also the condition of the Petitioner.
Copy of this Order shall be given forthwith to learned Attorney General of India, Mr. Shekhar Naphade and Mr. Andhyarujina, learned Senior Advocates.
Let the matter be listed as the first item on 2nd March, 2011.
9. On 2.3.2011, the matter was listed again before us and we first saw the screening of the CD submitted by the team of doctors along with their report. We had arranged for the screening of the CD in the Courtroom, so that all present in Court could see the condition of Aruna Shanbaug. For doing so, we have relied on the precedent of the Nuremburg trials in which a screening was done in the Courtroom of some of the Nazi atrocities during the Second World War. We have heard learned Counsel for the parties in great detail. The three doctors nominated by us are also present in Court. As requested by us, the doctors team submitted a supplementary report before us which states: Supplement To The Report Of The Medical Examination Of Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug Jointly prepared and signed by
1. Dr. J.V. Divatia (Professor and Head, Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain, at Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai)
2. Dr. Roop Gursahani (Consultant Neurologist at P.D. Hinduja Hospital, Mumbai)
3. Dr. Nilesh Shah (Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry at Lokmanya Tilak Municipal Corporation Medical College and General Hospital).
Mumbai
February 26, 2011
INDEX Introduction 3
Terminology 4
Glossary of Technical terms 7
Opinion 11 3
Introduction
This document is a supplement to the Report of Examination of Ms. Aruna Ramachandra Shanbaug, dated February 14, 2011.
On perusal of the report, the Hon. Court observed that there were many technical terms which a non-medical man would find it difficult to understand, and requested us to submit a supplementary report in which the meaning of these technical terms in the report is also explained.
We have therefore prepared this Supplement to include a glossary of technical terms used in the earlier Report, and also to clarify some of the terminology related to brain damage. Finally, we have given our opinion in the case of Aruna Shanbaug.
Terminology
The words coma, brain death and vegetative state are often used in common language to describe severe brain damage. However, in medical terminology, these terms have specific meaning and significance.
Brain death
A state of prolonged irreversible cessation of all brain activity, including lower brain stem function with the complete absence of voluntary movements, responses to stimuli, brain stem reflexes, and spontaneous respirations.
Explanation: This is the most severe form of brain damage. The patient is unconscious, completely unresponsive, has no reflex activity from centres in the brain, and has no breathing efforts on his own. However the heart is beating. This patient can only be maintained alive by advanced life support (breathing machine or ventilator, drugs to maintain blood pressure, etc). These patients can be legally declared dead ('brain dead') to allow their organs to be taken for donation.
Aruna Shanbaug is clearly not brain dead.
Coma
Patients in coma have complete failure of the arousal system with no spontaneous eye opening and are unable to be awakened by application of vigorous sensory stimulation.
Explanation: These patients are unconscious. They cannot be awakened even by application of a painful stimulus. They have normal heart beat and breathing, and do not require advanced life support to preserve life.
Aruna Shanbaug is clearly not in Coma.
Vegetative State (VS)
The complete absence of behavioral evidence for self or environmental awareness. There is preserved capacity for spontaneous or stimulus-induced arousal, evidenced by sleep-wake cycles. .i.e. patients are awake, but have no awareness.
Explanation: Patients appear awake. They have normal heart beat and breathing, and do not require advanced life support to preserve life. They cannot produce a purposeful, co-ordinated, voluntary response in a sustained manner, although they may have primitive reflexive responses to light, sound, touch or pain. They cannot understand, communicate, speak, or have emotions. They are unaware of self and environment and have no interaction with others. They cannot voluntarily control passing of urine or stools. They sleep and awaken. As the centres in the brain controlling the heart and breathing are intact, there is no threat to life, and patients can survive for many years with expert nursing care. The following behaviours may be seen in the vegetative state:
Sleep-wake cycles with eyes closed, then open
Patient breathes on her own
Spontaneous blinking and roving eye movements
Produce sounds but no words
Brief, unsustained visual pursuit (following an object with her eyes)
Grimacing to pain, changing facial expressions
Yawning; chewing jaw movements
Swallowing of her own spit
Nonpurposeful limb movements; arching of back
Reflex withdrawal from painful stimuli
Brief movements of head or eyes toward sound or movement without apparent localization or fixation
Startles with a loud sound
Almost all of these features consistent with the diagnosis of permanent vegetative state were present during the medical examination of Aruna Shanbaug.
Minimally Conscious State
Some patients with severe alteration in consciousness have neurologic findings that do not meet criteria for v. These patients demonstrate some behavioral evidence of conscious awareness but remain unable to reproduce this behavior consistently. This condition is referred to here as the minimally conscious state (MCS). MCS is distinguished from v. by the partial preservation of conscious awareness.
To make the diagnosis of MCS, limited but clearly discernible evidence of self or environmental awareness must be demonstrated on a reproducible or sustained basis by one or more of the following behaviors:
• Following simple commands.
• Gestural or verbal yes/no responses (regardless of accuracy).
• Intelligible sounds
• Purposeful behavior, including movements or emotional behaviors (smiling, crying) that occur in relation to relevant environmental stimuli and are not due to reflexive activity. Some examples of qualifying purposeful behavior include:
- appropriate smiling or crying in response to the linguistic or visual content of emotional but not to neutral topics or stimuli
- vocalizations or gestures that occur in direct response to the linguistic content of questions
- reaching for objects that demonstrates a clear relationship between object location and direction of reach
- touching or holding objects in a manner that accommodates the size and shape of the object
- pursuit eye movement or sustained fixation that occurs in direct response to moving or salient stimuli
None of the above behaviours suggestive of a Minimally Conscious State were observed during the examination of Aruna Shanbaug.
Opinion
In our view, the issues in this case (and other similar cases) are:
1. In a person who is in a permanent vegetative state (PVS), should withholding or withdrawal of life sustaining therapies (many authorities would include placement of an artificial feeding tube as a life sustaining intervention) be permissible or 'not unlawful' ?
2. If the patient has previously expressed a wish not to have life-sustaining treatments in case of futile care or a PVS, should his / her wishes be respected when the situation arises?
3. In case a person has not previously expressed such a wish, if his family or next of kin makes a request to withhold or withdraw futile life-sustaining treatments, should their wishes be respected?
4. Aruna Shanbaug has been abandoned by her family and is being looked after for the last 37 years by the staff of KEM Hospital. Who should take decisions on her behalf?
Questions such as these come up at times in the course of medical practice. We realize that answers to these questions are difficult, and involve several ethical, legal and social issues. Our opinion is based on medical facts and on the principles of medical ethics. We hope that the Honourable Court will provide guidance and clarity in this matter.
Two of the cardinal principles of medical ethics are Patient Autonomy and Beneficiance.
1. Autonomy means the right to self-determination, where the informed patient has a right to choose the manner of his treatment. To be autonomous the patient should be competent to make decisions and choices. In the event that he is incompetent to make choices, his wishes expressed in advance in the form of a Living Will, OR the wishes of surrogates acting on his behalf ('substituted judgment') are to be respected.
The surrogate is expected to represent what the patient may have decided had he / she been competent, or to act in the patient's best interest. It is expected that a surrogate acting in the patient's best interest follows a course of action because it is best for the patient, and is not influenced by personal convictions, motives or other considerations.
2. Beneficence is acting in what is (or judged to be) in patient's best interest. Acting in the patient's best interest means following a course of action that is best for the patient, and is not influenced by personal convictions, motives or other considerations. In some cases, the doctor's expanded goals may include allowing the natural dying process (neither hastening nor delaying death, but 'letting nature take its course'), thus avoiding or reducing the sufferings of the patient and his family, and providing emotional support. This is not to be confused with euthanasia, which involves the doctor's deliberate and intentional act through administering a lethal injection to end the life of the patient.
In the present case under consideration
1. We have no indication of Aruna Shanbaug's views or wishes with respect to life-sustaining treatments for a permanent vegetative state.
2. Any decision regarding her treatment will have to be taken by a surrogate
3. The staff of the KEM hospital have looked after her for 37 years, after she was abandoned by her family. We believe that the Dean of the KEM Hospital (representing the staff of hospital) is an appropriate surrogate.
4. If the doctors treating Aruna Shanbaug and the Dean of the KEM Hospital, together acting in the best interest of the patient, feel that life sustaining treatments should continue, their decision should be respected.
5. If the doctors treating Aruna Shanbaug and the Dean of the KEM Hospital, together acting in the best interest of the patient, feel that withholding or withdrawing life-sustaining treatments is the appropriate course of action, they should be allowed to do so, and their actions should not be considered unlawful.
10. To complete the narration of facts and before we come to the legal issues involved, we may mention that Dr. Sanjay Oak, Dean KEM Hospital Mumbai has issued a statement on 24.1.2011 opposing euthanasia for the Petitioner:
She means a lot to KEM hospital. She is on liquid diet and loves listening to music. We have never subjected her to intravenous food or fed her via a tube. All these years, she hasn't had even one bedsore. When those looking after her do not have a problem, I don't understand why a third party who has nothing to do with her [Pinky Virani who has moved the apex court to seek euthanasia for Shanbaug] needs to worry," added Dr Oak, who, when he took over as dean of KEM hospital in 2008, visited her first to take her blessings. "I call on her whenever I get time. I am there whenever she has dysentery or any another problem. She is very much alive and we have faith in the judiciary," said Dr Oak.
11. Dr. Sanjay Oak has subsequently filed an affidavit in this Court which states:
a) Smt. Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug has been admitted in a single room in Ward No. 4 which is a ward of general internal medicine patients and she has been there for last 37 years. She is looked after entirely by doctors, nurses and para-medical staff of KEM Hospital. She has been our staff nurse and the unfortunate tragic incidence has happened with her in KEM Hospital and I must put on record that the entire medical, administrative, nursing and para-medical staff is extremely attached to her and consider her as one of us. Her relatives and a gentleman (her fiancee) used to visit her in the initial period of her illness but subsequently she has been left to the care of KEM staff. I visit her frequently and my last visit to her was on 22nd February, 2011. I give my observations as a Clinician about Smt. Aruna Shanbaug as under:
b) It would be incorrect to say that Smt. Aruna Shanbaug is an appropriate case for Coma. It appears that for a crucial, critical period her brain was deprived of Oxygen supply and this has resulted in her present state similar to that of Cerebral Palsy in the newborn child. It is a condition where brain looses it's co-ordinatory, sensory as well as motor functions and this includes loss of speech and perception. This has resulted into a state which in a layman's words "Aruna lives in her own world for last 37 years". She is lying in a bed in a single room for 33 years. She has not been able to stand or walk, nor have we attempted to do that of late because we fear that she is fragile and would break her bones if she falls. Her extremities and fingers have developed contractures and subsequent to non-use; there is wasting of her body muscles. Her eyes are open and she blinks frequently; however, these movements are not pertaining to a specific purpose or as a response to a question. At times she is quiet and at times she shouts or shrieks. However, I must say that her shouts and shrieks are completely oblivious to anybody's presence in her room. It is not true that she shouts after seeing a man. I do not think Aruna can distinguish between a man and a woman, nor can she even distinguish between ordinate and inordinate object. We play devotional songs rendered by Sadguru Wamanrao Pai continuously in her room and she lies down on her bed listening to them. She expresses her displeasure by grimaces and shouts if the tape recorder is switched off. All these years she was never fed by tube and whenever a nurse used to take food to her lips, she used to swallow it. It is only since September 2010 she developed Malaria and her oral intake dropped. In order to take care of her calorie make need, nurses cadre resorted to naso-gastric tube feed and now she is used to NG feeding. However, if small morsels are held near her lips, Aruna accepts them gladly. It appears that she relishes fish and occasionally smiles when she is given non-vegetarian food. However, I am honest in admitting that her smiles are not purposeful and it would be improper to interpret them as a signal of gratification. I must put on record that in the world history of medicine there would not be another single case where such a person is cared and nurtured in bed for 33 long years and has not developed a single bed sore. This speaks of volumes of excellence of nursing care that KEM Nursing staff has given to her.
c) This care is given not as a part of duty but as a part of feeling of oneness. With every new batch of entrants, the student nurses are introduced to her and they are told that she was one of us and she continues to be one of us and then they whole-heartedly take care of Aruna. In my opinion, this one is finest example of love, professionalism, dedication and commitment to one of our professional colleagues who is ailing and cannot support herself. Not once, in this long sojourn of 33 years, anybody has thought of putting an end to her so called vegetative existence. There have been several Deans and Doctors of KEM Hospital who have cared her in succession. Right from illustrious Dr. C.K. Deshpande in whose tenure the incidence happened in 1973, Dr. G.B. Parulkar, Dr. Smt. Pragna M. Pai, Dr. R.J. Shirahatti, Dr. Smt. N.A. Kshirsagar, Dr. M.E. Yeolekar and now myself Dr. Sanjay N. Oak, all of us have visited her room time and again and have cared for her and seen her through her ups and downs. The very idea of withholding food or putting her to sleep by active medication (mercy killing) is extremely difficult for anybody working in Seth GSMC & KEM Hospital to accept and I sincerely make a plea to the Learned Counsel and Hon'ble Judges of Supreme Court of India that this should not be allowed. Aruna has probably crossed 60 years of life and would one day meet her natural end. The Doctors, Nurses and staff of KEM, are determined to take care of her till her last breath by natural process.
d) I do not think it is proper on my part to make a comment on the entire case. However, as a clinical surgeon for last 3 decades and as an administrator of the hospitals for last 7 years and as a student of legal system of India (as I hold "Bachelor of Law" degree from Mumbai University), I feel that entire society has not matured enough to accept the execution of an Act of Euthanasia or Mercy Killing. I fear that this may get misused and our monitoring and deterring mechanisms may fail to prevent those unfortunate incidences. To me any mature society is best judged by it's capacity and commitment to take care of it's "invalid" ones. They are the children of Lesser God and in fact, developing nation as we are, we should move in a positive manner of taking care of several unfortunate ones who have deficiencies, disabilities and deformities.
12. The Hospital staff of KEM Hospital, Mumbai e.g. the doctors, sister-in-charge ward No. 4 KEM hospital Lenny Cornielo, Assistant Matron Urmila Chauhan and others have also issued statements that they were looking after Aruna Shanbaug and want her to live. "Aruna is the bond that unites us", the KEM Hospital staff has stated. One retired nurse, Tidi Makwana, who used to take care of Aruna while in service, has even offered to continue to take care of her without any salary and without charging any traveling expenses.
13. We have referred to these statements because it is evident that the KEM Hospital staff right from the Dean, including the present Dean Dr. Sanjay Oak and down to the staff nurses and para-medical staff have been looking after Aruna for 38 years day and night. What they have done is simply marvelous. They feed Aruna, wash her, bathe her, cut her nails, and generally take care of her, and they have been doing this not on a few occasions but day and night, year after year. The whole country must learn the meaning of dedication and sacrifice from the KEM hospital staff. In 38 years Aruna has not developed one bed sore.
14. It is thus obvious that the KEM hospital staff has developed an emotional bonding and attachment to Aruna Shanbaug, and in a sense they are her real family today. Ms. Pinki Virani who claims to be the next friend of Aruna Shanbaug and has filed this petition on her behalf is not a relative of Aruna Shanbaug nor can she claim to have such close emotional bonding with her as the KEM hospital staff. Hence, we are treating the KEM hospital staff as the next friend of Aruna Shanbaug and we decline to recognize Ms. Pinki Virani as her next friend. No doubt Ms. Pinki Virani has written a book about Aruna Shanbaug and has visited her a few times, and we have great respect for her for the social causes she has espoused, but she cannot claim to have the extent of attachment or bonding with Aruna which the KEM hospital staff, which has been looking after her for years, claims to have.
SUBMISSIONS OF LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE PARTIES
15. Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel for the Petitioner has relied on the decision of this Court in Vikram Deo Singh Tomar v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0572/1988 : 1988 (Supp) SCC 734 (vide para 2) where it was observed by this Court:
We live in an age when this Court has demonstrated, while interpreting Article 21 of the Constitution, that every person is entitled to a quality of life consistent with his human personality. The right to live with human dignity is the fundamental right of every Indian citizen.
16. He has also relied on the decision of this Court in P. Rathinam v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0433/1994 : (1994) 3 SCC 394 in which a two-Judge bench of this Court quoted with approval a passage from an article by Dr. M. Indira and Dr. Alka Dhal in which it was mentioned:
Life is not mere living but living in health. Health is not the absence of illness but a glowing vitality.
17. The decision in Rathinam's case (supra) was, however, overruled by a Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Gian Kaur v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0335/1996 : (1996) 2 SCC 648.
18. Mr. Naphade, however, has invited our attention to paras 24 & 25 of the aforesaid decision in which it was observed:
(24) Protagonism of euthanasia on the view that existence in persistent vegetative state (PVS) is not a benefit to the patient of a terminal illness being unrelated to the principle of 'sanctity of life' or the right to live with dignity' is of no assistance to determine the scope of Article 21 for deciding whether the guarantee of right to life' therein includes the right to die'. The right to life' including the right to live with human dignity would mean the existence of such a right upto the end of natural life. This also includes the right to a dignified life upto the point of death including a dignified procedure of death. In other words, this may include the right of a dying man to also die with dignity when his life is ebbing out. But the 'right to die' with dignity at the end of life is not to be confused or equated with the right to die' an unnatural death curtailing the natural span of life.
(25) A question may arise, in the context of a dying man, who is, terminally ill or in a persistent vegetative state that he may be permitted to terminate it by a premature extinction of his life in those circumstances. This category of cases may fall within the ambit of the 'right to die' with dignity as a part of right to live with dignity, when death due to termination of natural life is certain and imminent and the process of natural death has commenced. These are not cases of extinguishing life but only of accelerating conclusion of the process of natural death which has already commenced. The debate even in such cases to permit physician assisted termination of life is inconclusive. It is sufficient to reiterate that the argument to support the view of permitting termination of life in such cases to reduce the period of suffering during the process of certain natural death is not available to interpret Article 21 to include therein the right to curtail the natural span of life.