MANU/SC/0356/1982
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Criminal Appeal No. 273 of 1979 and Writ Petn. Nos. 89, 165, 168, 179, 434, 564, 754, 756 and 976 of 1979 and Spl. Leave Petn. (Cri.) No. 1732 of 1979
Decided On: 16.08.1982
Appellants: Bachan Singh and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: State of Punjab and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
P.N. Bhagwati, J.
Subject: Criminal
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 2(b); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 235; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 354; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 354(3); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 366; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 367; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 368; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 369; Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 161, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(f), Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(g), Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 26, Constitution Of India - Article 3, Constitution Of India - Article 31, Constitution Of India - Article 40, Constitution Of India - Article 5, Constitution Of India - Article 6, Constitution Of India - Article 7, Constitution Of India - Article 72; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 149; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 302; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 34
Relevant Section:
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 302; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 354
Cases Referred:
Jagmohan v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0139/1972; State of Washington v. Dawson and Company (1923) 264 US 219, 68 L. ed 2d 646; Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India MANU/SC/0133/1978; Dalbir Singh v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0099/1979; Doe d. Hindson v. Kersey; A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras MANU/SC/0012/1950; Rajendra Prasad v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0212/1979; Furman v. Georgia (1972) 408 US 238; Ichikawa v. Japan; Saghir Ahmed v. State of Uttar Pradesh MANU/SC/0110/1954; B. Banerjee v. Anita Pan MANU/SC/0449/1974; Ram Krishna Dalmia v. S.R. Tendolkar MANU/SC/0024/1958; State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala MANU/SC/0019/1957; Pathumma v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0315/1978; State of Madras v. V.J. Row MANU/SC/0013/1952; Gregg v. Georgia (1976) 428 US 153; Coker v. Georgia (1977) 433 US 584; Rex v. Miller and Cockriell 70 DLR 324; Tyrer v. United Kingdom 2 EHRRI (1978); People v. Oliver 1 N. Y. 2dd 152; Fowler v. North Carolina (1976) 96 S Ct 3212; Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0077/1979; Babu v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0066/1965; Mukhtiar Singh v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0146/1971; Gurcharan Singh v. State of Puniab MANU/SC/0136/1962; Raghubir Singh v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0185/1974; Raghomani v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0189/1975; Ediga Anamma v. State of Andh. Pra. MANU/SC/0128/1974; Chawla v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0119/1974; State of Punjab v. Hari Singh MANU/SC/0227/1974; Lajar Masih v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0135/1976; Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration MANU/SC/0184/1978; District Attorney for the Suffolk District v. Watson Mass. Adv. Sh. (1980); R.C. Cooper v. Union of India MANU/SC/0011/1970; Shambhu Nath Sarkar v. State of West Bengal MANU/SC/0163/1973; State of Bombay v. Bhanji Munji MANU/SC/0034/1954; Minerva Mills case MANU/SC/0075/1980; Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India MANU/SC/0048/1979; Francis Coralie Mullen v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi MANU/SC/0517/1981; In Re: Kemmler 136 US 436; In Re: Medley 134 US 160; Khyerbari Tea Company v. State of Assam MANU/SC/0048/1963; Mohd. Hanif v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0027/1958; Locketre v. Ohio (1978) 438 US 586; Commonwealth v. O'Neal (No. 2) 339 NE 2d 676; McGactha v. California (1971) 402 US 183; Masalti v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0074/1964; State of U.P. v. Samman Das MANU/SC/0268/1972; Gurdas Singh v. State of Rajastan MANU/SC/0126/1975; Bhagwan Swarup v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0094/1970; Bhoor Singh v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0109/1974; Rishideo v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0091/1955; Bharwad Mepa Dana v. State of Bombay MANU/SC/0040/1959; Vasant Laxman More v. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0234/1974; Haradhan Sana v. State of West Bengal MANU/SC/0419/1974; Khudiram Das v. State of West Bengal MANU/SC/0423/1974; Kochuni's case MANU/SC/0019/1960
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  32

Dissented
  2

Mentioned
  9

Case Note:
Constitution - death penalty - Section 302 of Indian Penal Code, 1860, Section 353 (4) of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and Articles 14 and 21 of Constitution of India - constitutional validity of death penalty under Section 302 read with Section 353 (4) under challenge - majority opinion had earlier held the same to be constitutionally valid - as per minority opinion said provisions were unconstitutional and void as being violative of Articles 14 and 21 - death penalty did not serve any social purpose and was arbitrary and unreasonable - by killing murderer reformative process is bypassed - no additional deterrent effect from life sentence - life sentence is now rule and death sentence in only exceptional cases - Legislature has never indicated those exceptional cases - death penalty barbaric and its effect inhuman - penological goals do not justify imposition death penalty - death penalty strikes mostly against poor and deprived sections of society so discriminatory - Constitution of India places human beings at center of constitutional scheme and focuses on full development of is personality - burden lies on petitioner to prove that statute is arbitrary and discriminatory - in exceptional cases initial burden can be placed on State - burden lies on State to prove reasonableness and fairness of law providing for death penalty - minority judgment held death penalty to be unconstitutional - majority judgment had earlier held the same to be constitutional.

JUDGMENT
1. These writ petitions challenge the constitutional validity of Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354, Sub-section (3) of the CrPC in so far as it provides death sentence as an alternative punishment for the offence of murder. There are several grounds on which the constitutional validity of the death penalty provided in Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 Sub-section (3) of the CrPC is assailed before us, but it is not necessary to set them out at this stage, for I propose to deal with them when I examine the arguments advanced on behalf of the parties. Suffice it to state for the present that I find, considerable force in some of these grounds and in my view, the constitutional validity of the death penalty provided as an alternative punishment in Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 Sub-section (3) of the CrPC cannot be sustained. I am conscious that my learned brethren on the Bench who constitute the majority have taken a different view and upheld the constitutional validity of the death penalty but, with the greatest respect to them and in all humility, I cannot persuade myself to concur with the view taken by them. Mine is unfortunately a solitary dissent and it is therefore with a certain amount of hesitation that I speak but my initial diffidence is overcome by my deep and abiding faith in the dignity of man and worth of the human person and passionate conviction about the true spiritual nature and dimension of man. I agree with Bernad Shaw that "Criminals do not die by the hands of the law. They die by the hands of other men. Assassination on the scaffold is the worst form of assassination because there it is invested with the approval of the society.... Murder and capital punishment are not opposites that cancel one another but similar that breed their kind." It was the Father of the nation who said years ago, reaffirming what Prince Satyavan said on capital punishment in Shanti Parva 10 of Mahabarata that "Destruction of individuals can never be a virtuous act" and this sentiment has been echoed by many eminent men such as Leonardo Da Vinci, John Bright, Victor Hugo and Berdyaev. To quote again from Bernard Shaw from Act IV of his play "Caesar and Cleopatra:
And so to the end of history, murder
shall breed murder, always in the name
of right and honour and peace, until
the Gods are tired of blood and create
a race that can understand.
I share this sentiment because I regard men as an embodiment of divinity and I am therefore morally against death penalty. But my dissent is based not upon any ground of morality or ethics but is founded on constitutional issues, for as I shall presently show, death penalty does not serve any social purpose or advance any constitutional value and is totally arbitrary and unreasonable so as to be violative of Articles 14, 19, 21 of the Constitution.
2. Before I proceed to consider the various constitutional issues arising out of the challenge to the validity of the death penalty, I must deal with a preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondents against our competence to entertain this challenge. The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents urged that the question of constitutional validity of the death penalty stood concluded against the petitioners by the decision of a Constitution bench of five Judges of this Court in Jagmohan v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0139/1972 : 1973CriLJ370 and it could not therefore be allowed to be reagitated before this Bench consisting of the same number of Judges. This Bench, contended the respondents, was bound by the decision in Jagmohan's case (supra) and the same issue, once decided in Jagmohan's case (supra), could not be raised again and reconsidered by this Bench. Now it is true that the question of constitutional validity of death penalty was raised in Jagmohan's case (supra) and this Court by a unanimous judgment held it to be constitutionally valid and therefore, ordinarily, on the principle of stare decisis, we would hold ourselves bound by the view taken in that case and resist any attempt at reconsideration of the same issue. But there are several weighty considerations which compel us to depart from this presidential rule in the present case. It may be pointed out that the rule of adherence to precedence is not a rigid and inflexible rule of law but it is a rule of practice adopted by the courts for the purpose of ensuring uniformity and stability in the law. Otherwise, every Judge will decide an issue according to his own view and lay down a rule according to his own perception and there will be no certainty and predictability in the law, leading to chaos and confusion and in the process, destroying the rule of law. The labour of the judges would also, as pointed out by Cardozo J. in his lectures on "Nature of Judicial Process" increase "almost to the breaking point if every past decision could be reopened in every case and one could not lay one's own course of bricks on the secure foundation of the courses laid by others who had gone before him." But this rule of adherence to precedents, though a necessary tool in what Maitland called the legal smithy," is only a useful servant and cannot be allowed to turn into a tyrannous master. We would do well to recall what Brandies J. said in his dissenting judgment in State of Washington v. Dawson and company, 264 US 646 : 68 L E. 219 namely; "Stare decisis is ordinarily a wise rule of action. But it is not a universal and inexorable command." If the rule of stare decisis were followed blindly and mechanically, it would dwarf and stultify the growth of the law and affect its capacity to adjust itself to the changing needs of the society. That is why Cardozo painted out in his New York State Bar Address :
That was very well for a time, but now at last the precedents have turned upon us and are engulfing and annihilating us-engulfing and annihilating the very devotees that Worshiped at their shrine. So the air is full of new cults that disavow the ancient faiths. Some of them tell us that instead of seeking certainty in the word, the outward sign, we are to seek for something deeper, a certainty of ends and aims. Some of them tell us that certainty is merely relative and temporary, a writing on the sands to be effaced by the advancing tides. Some of them even go so far as to adjure us to give over the vain guest, to purge ourselves of these yearnings for an unattainable idea), and to be content with an empiricism that is untroubled by strivings for the absolute. With all their diversities of form and doctrine, they are at one at least in their emphasis upon those aspects of truth that are fundamental and ultimate. They exemplify the method approach, the attitude and outlook, the concern about the substance of things, which in all its phases and disguises is the essence of philosophy.
We must therefore rid stare decisis of something of its petrifying rigidity and warn ourselves with Cardozo that in many instances the principles and rules and concepts of our own creation are merely apercus and glimpses of reality" and remind ourselves of the need of reformulating them or at times abandoning them altogether when they stand condemned as mischievous in the social consciousness of the hour,...the social consciousness which it is our business as Judges to interpret as best as we can." The question at issue in the present writ petitions is one of momentous significance namely, whether the State can take the life of an individual under the cover of judicial process and whether such an act of killing by the State is in accord with the constitutional norms and values and if, on an issue like this, a Judge feels strongly that it is not competent to the State to extinguish the flame of life in an individual by employing the instrumentality of the judicial process, it is his bounden duty, in all conscience, to express his dissent, even if such killing by the State is legitimized by a previous decision of the court. There are certain issues which transcend technical considerations of stare decisis and if such an issue is brought before the court, it would be nothing short of abdication of its constitutional duty for the court to refuse to consider such issue by taking refuge under the doctrine of stare decisis. The court may refuse to entertain such an issue like the constitutional validity of death penalty because it is satisfied that the previous decision is correct but it cannot decline to consider it on the ground that it is barred by the rule of adherence to precedents. Moreover, in the present case, there are two other supervening circumstances which justify, and compel, reconsideration of the decision in Jagmohan's case (supra). The first is the introduction of the new CrPC in 1973 which by Section 354 Sub-section (3) has made life sentence the rule in case of offences punishable with death or in the 5 alternative imprisonment for life and provided for imposition of sentence of death only in exceptional cases for special reasons. I shall presently refer to this section enacted in the new CrPC and show how, in view of that provision, the imposition of death penalty has, become still more indefensible from the constitutional point of view. But the more important circumstance which has supervened since the decision in Jagmohan's case (supra)'is the new dimension of Articles 14 and 21 unfolded by this Court in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India 1978 (2) SCR 663. This new dimension of Articles 14 and 21 renders the death penalty provided in Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354(3) of the CrPC vulnerable to attack on a ground not available at the time when Jagmohan's case (supra) was decided. Furthermore, it may also be noted, and this too is a circumstance not entirely without significance, that since Jagmohan's case (supra) was decided, India has ratified two international instruments on Human rights and particularly the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. We cannot therefore consider ourselves bound by the view taken in Jagmohan's case (supra) and I must proceed to consider the issue as regards the constitutional validity of death penalty afresh, without being in any manner inhibited by the decision in Jagmohan's case (supra).
3. It must be realised that the question of constitutional validity of death penalty, is not just a simple question of application of constitutional standards by adopting a mechanistic approach. It is a difficult problem of constitutional interpretation to which it is not possible to give an objectively correct legal answer. It is not a mere legalistic problem which can be answered definitively by the application of logical reasoning but it is a problem which raises profound social and moral issues and the answer must therefore necessarily depend on the judicial philosophy of the Judge, This would be so in case of any problem of constitutional interpretation but much more so would it be in a case like the present where the constitutional conundrum is enmeshed in complex social and moral issues defying a formalistic judicial attitude. That is the reason why in some countries like the United States and Canada where there is power of judicial review, there has been judicial disagreement on the constitutionality of death penalty. On an issue like this, as pointed out by David Pannick in his book on "Judicial Review of the Death Penalty" judicial conclusions emanate from the judicial philosophy of those who sit in judgment and not from the language of the Constitution." But even so, in their effort to resolve such an issue of great constitutional significance, the Judges must take care to see that they are guided by "objective factors to the maximum possible extent." The culture and ethos of the nation as ' gathered from its history, its tradition and its literature would clearly be relevant factors in adjudging the constitutionality of death penalty 50 and so would the ideals and values embodied in the Constitution which lays down the basic frame-work of the social and political structure of the country, and which sets out the objectives and goals to be pursued by the people in a common endeavour to secure happiness and welfare of every member of the society. So also standards or, norms set by International organisations and bodies have relevance in determining the constitutional validity of death penalty and equally important in construing and applying the equivocal formulae of the Constitution would be the "wealth of non-legal learning and experience that encircles and illuminates" the topic of death penalty. "Judicial dispensers," said Krishna Iyer, J. in Dalbir Singh and Ors. v. State of Punjab 1979 (3) SCR 1959 "do not behave like cavemen but breathe the fresh air of finer culture." There is no reason why, in adjudicating upon the constitutional validity of death penalty, Judges should not obtain assistance from the writings of men like Dickens, Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky, Koestter and Camus or from the investigations of social scientists or moral philosophers in deciding the circumstances in which and the reasons why the death penalty could be seen as arbitrary or a denial of equal protection. It is necessary to bear in mind the wise and felicitous words of Judge Learned Hand in his "Spirit of Liberty" that while passing on a question of constitutional interpretation, it is as important to a Judge :
...to have at least a bowing acquaintance with Acton and Maitland. With Thucydides, Gibbon and Carlyle, with Homer, Dante, Shakespeare and Milton, with Machiavelli, Montaigne and Rabelais, with Plato, Bacon, Hume and Kant, as with the books which have been specifically written on the subject. For in such matters everything turns upon the spirit in which he approaches the question before him. The words he must construe are empty vessels into which he can pour nearly anything he will. Men do not gather figs of thistles, nor supply institutions from judges whose outlook is limited by parish or class. They must be aware that there are before them more than verbal problems; more than final solutions cast in generalisations of universal applicability.
Constitutional law raises, in a legal context, problems of economic, social, moral and political theory and practice to which non-lawyers have much to contribute. Non-lawyers have not reached unanimity on the answers to the problems posed; nor will they ever do so. But when judges are confronted by issues to which there is no legal answer, there is no reason (other than a desire to maintain a fiction that the law provides the answer) for judicial discretion to be exercised in a vacuum, immune from non-legal learning and extra-legal dispute. 'Quotations from noble minds are not for decoration (in hard constitutional cases) but for adaptation within the framework of the law. "Vide: David Pannick on 'Judicial Review of the Death Penalty.' The Judges must also consider while deciding an issue of constitutional adjudication as to what would be the moral, social and economic consequences of a decision either way. The consequences of course do not alter the meaning of a constitutional or statutory provision but they certainly help to fix its meaning. With these prefatory observations I shall now proceed to consider the question of constitutional validity of death penalty.
4. I shall presently refer to the constitutional provisions which bear on the question of constitutionality of death penalty, but before I do so, it would be more logical if I first examine what is the international trend of opinion in regard to death penalty. There are quite a large number of countries which have abolished death penalty de jure or in any event, de facto. The Addendum to the Report of the Amnesty International on "The Death Penalty" points out that as of 30th May 1979, the following countries have abolished death penalty for all offences: Australia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fiji, Finland, Federal Republic of Germany, Honduras, Iceland, Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Uruguay and Venezuela, and according to this Report, Canada, Italy, Malta, Netherlands, Panama, Peru, Spain and Switzerland have abolished death penalty in time of peace, but retained it for specific offences committed in time of war. The Report also states that Algeria, Belgium, Greece, Guyana, Ivory Coast, Seychelles and Upper Volta have retained the death penalty on their statute book but they did not conduct any executions for the period from 1973 to 30th May 1979. Even in the United States of America there are several States which have abolished death penalty and so also in the United Kingdom, death penalty stands abolished from the year 1965 save and except for offences of treason and certain forms of piracy and offences committed by members of the armed forces during war time. It may be pointed out that an attempt was made in the United Kingdom in December 1975 to reintroduce death penalty for terrorist offences involving murder but it was defeated in the House of Commons and once again a similar motion moved by a conservative member of Parliament that "the sentence of capital punishment should again be available to the courts" was defeated in the House of Commons in a free vote on 19th July 1978. So also death penalty has been abolished either formally or in practice in several other countries such as Argentina, Bolivia, most of the federal States of Mexico and Nicaragua. Israel, Turkey and Australia do not use the death penalty in practice. It will thus be seen that there is a definite trend in most of the countries of Europe and America towards abolition of death penalty.
5. It is significant to note that the United Nations has also taken great interest in the abolition of capital punishment. In the Charter of the United Nations signed in 1945, the founding States emphasized the value of individual's life, stating their will to "achieve international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion". Though the San Francisco Conference did not address itself to the issue of death penalty specifically, the provisions of the charter paved the way for further action by United Nations bodies in the field of human rights, by establishing a Commission on Human Rights and, in effect, charged that body with formulating an International Bill of Human Rights. Meanwhile the 40 Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted by the General Assembly in its Resolution 217 A (III) of 10 December 1948. Articles 3 and 5 of the Declaration provided:
3. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of person
5. "No one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
The United Nations position on the question of death penalty was expected to be stated more specifically in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the drafting of which had been under way since the first session of the Commission on Human Rights in 1947. But during the 11-year period of drafting of the relevant provision of the Covenant, two main approaches to the issue of capital punishment became evident: one stressed the need for barring the death penalty and the second placed emphasis on restricting its apply to certain cases. The proponents of the first position suggested either the total abolition of the death penalty or its abolition in time of peace or for political offences. This approach was however regarded as unfeasible, since many countries, including abolitionist ones, felt that the provision for an outright ban on the death penalty would prevent some States from ratifying the Covenant, but at the same time, it was insisted by many countries that the Covenant should not create the impression of supporting or perpetuating death penalty and hence a provision to this effect should be included. The result was that the second approach stressing everyone's right to life and emphasizing the need for restricting the application of capital punishment with a view to eventual abolition of the death penalty, won greater support and Article 6 of the Covenant as finally adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 2200 (XXI) of 16 December 1966 provided as follows:
1. Every human being has the inherent right to life. This right shall be protected by law. No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life.
2. In 'countries which have not abolished the death penalty, sentence of death may be imposed only for the most serious crimes in accordance with the law in force at the time of the commission of the crime and not contrary to the provisions of the present Covenant and to the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. This penalty can only be carried out pursuant to a final judgment rendered by a competent court.
3. When deprivation of life constitutes the crime of genocide, it is understood that nothing in this article shall authorize any State Party to the present Covenant to derogate in any way from any obligation assumed under the provision of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
4. Anyone sentenced to death shall have the right to seek pardon or commutation of the sentence. Amnesty pardon or commutation of the sentence of death may be granted in all cases.
5. Sentence of death shall not be imposed for crimes committed by persons below eighteen years of age and shall not be carried out on pregnant women.
6. Nothing in this article shall be invoked to delay or prevent the abolition of capital punishment by any State Party to the present Covenant.
Article 7 of the Covenant corresponding to Article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights reaffirmed that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
6. So deep and profound was the United Nation's concern with the issue of death penalty that the General Assembly in its resolution 1396 (XIV) of 20th November, 1959 invited the Economic and Social Council to initiate study of the question of capital punishment, of the laws and practices relating thereto, and of the effects of capital punishment and the abolition thereof on the rate of criminality. Pursuant to this resolution, the Economic and Social Council activised itself on this issue and at its instance a substantive report was prepared by the noted French Jurist Marc Ancel. The report entitled "Capital Punishment" was the first major survey of the problem from 50 an international standpoint on the deterrent aspect of the death penalty and in its third chapter, it contained a cautious statement "that the deterrent effect of the death penalty is, to say the least, not demonstrated." This view had been expressed not only by abolitionists countries in their replies to the questionnaires but also by some retentions countries. The Ancel report along with the Report of the ad hoc Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders which examined it in January 1963 was presented to the Economic and Social Council at its 35th Session when its Resolution 934 (XXXV) of 9th April 1963 it was adopted. By this Resolution the Economic and Social Council urged member governments inter alia to keep under review the efficacy of capital punishment as a deterrent to crime in their countries and to conduct research into the subject and to remove this punishment from the criminal law concerning any crime to which it is, in fact, not applied or to which there is no intention to apply it. This Resolution clearly shows that there was no evidence supporting the supposed deterrent effect of the death penalty and that is why the Economic and Social Council suggested further research on the topic. Moreover, the urging of the de facto abolitionist countries by this Resolution to translate the position into de jure terms constituted an implicit acceptance of the principle of abolition. The same year, by Resolution 1918 (XVIII) of 5th December, 1963, the General Assembly endorsed this action of the Economic and Social Council and requested the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission on Human Rights to study and make recommendations on the Ancel Report and the comments of the ad hoc Advisory Committee of Experts. The General Assembly also requested the Secretary General to present a report on new developments through the Economic and Social Council. Norval Morris, an American Professor of criminal law and criminology, accordingly prepared a Report entitled "Capital Punishment; Developments 1961-1965" and amongst other things, this Report pointed out that there was a steady movement towards legislative abolition of capital punishment and observed with regard to the deterrent effect of death penalty, that:
with respect to the influence of the abolition of capital punishment upon the incidence of murder, all of the available data suggest that where the murder rate is increasing, abolition does not appear to hasten the increase; where the rate is decreasing abolition does not appear to interrupt the decrease; where the rate is stable, the presence or absence of capital punishment does not appear to affect it.
The Commission on Human Rights considered this report and adopted a draft General Assembly Resolution which was submitted by the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly and on, 26th November 1968, the General Assembly adopted this draft with 40 certain modifications as its Resolution 2393 (XXIII) inviting member governments to take various measures and requesting the Secretary General to invite member governments "to inform him of their present attitude to possible further restricting the use of the death penalty or to its total abolition" and to submit a report to the Economic and Social Council. The Secretary General accordingly submitted his report to the Economic and Social Council at its 50th session in 1971. This report contained a finding that "most countries are gradually restricting the number of offences for which the death penalty is to be applied and a few have totally abolished capital offences even in war times". The discussion in the Economic and Social Council led to the adoption of Resolution 1574 (L) of 20th May 1971 which was reaffirmed by General Assembly Resolution 2857 (XXVI) of 20th December 1971. This latter resolution clearly affirmed that:
In order to guarantee fully the right to life, provided for in Article 3 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the main objective to be pursued is that of progressively restricting the number of offences for which capital punishment may be imposed, with a view to the desirability of abolishing this punishment in all countries".
(Emphasis supplied.)
7. In 1973 the Secretary-General submitted to the Economic and Social Council at its 54th session his third report on capital punishment as requested by the Council and at this session, the Council adopted Resolution 1745 (LIV) in which, inter alia, it invited the Secretary General to submit to it periodic updated reports on capital punishment at five-year intervals starting from 1975. A fourth report on capital punishment was accordingly submitted in 1975 and a fifth one in 1980. Meanwhile the General Assembly at its 32nd Session adopted Resolution 32/61 on 8th December 1977, and this Resolution reaffirmed "the desirability of abolishing this" that is capital "punishment" in all countries.
8. It will thus be seen that the United Nations has gradually shifted from the position of a neutral observer concerned about but not committed on the question of death penalty, to a position favouring the eventual abolition of the death penalty. The objective of the United Nations has been and that is the standard set by the world body that capital punishment should ultimately be abolished in all countries. This normative standard set by the world body must be taken into account in determining whether the death penalty can be regarded as arbitrary, excessive and unreasonable so as to be constitutionally invalid.
9. I will now proceed to consider the relevant provisions of the Constitution bearing on the question of constitutional validity of death penalty. It may be pointed out that our Constitution is a unique document. It is not a mere pedantic legal text but it embodies certain human values cherished principles and spiritual norms and recognises and upholds the dignity of man. It accepts the individual as the focal point of all development and regards his material, moral and spiritual development as the chief concern of its various provisions. It does not treat the individual as a cog in the mighty all-powerful machine of the State but places him at the center of the constitutional scheme and focuses on the fullest development of his personality. The Preamble makes it clear that the Constitution is intended to secure to every citizen social, economic and political justice and equality of status and opportunity and to promote fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual. The Fundamental Rights lay down limitations on the power of the legislature and the executive with a view to protecting the citizen and confer certain basic human rights which are enforceable against the State in a court of law. The Directive Principles of State Policy also emphasise the dignity of the individual and the worth of the human person by obligating the State to take various measures for the purpose of securing and protecting a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of national life. What is the concept of social and economic justice which the founding fathers had in mind is also elaborated in the various Articles setting out the Directive Principles of State Policy. But all these provisions enacted for the purpose of ensuring the dignity of the individual and providing for his material, moral and spiritual development would be meaningless and ineffectual unless there is rule of law to invest them with life and force.
10. Now if we look at the various constitutional provisions including the Chapters on Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy, it is clear that the rule of law permeates the entire fabric of the Constitution and indeed forms one of its basic features. The rule of law excludes arbitrariness; its postulate is 'intelligence without passion' and 'reason freed from desire'. Wherever we find arbitrariness or unreasonableness there is denial of the rule of law. That is why Aristotle preferred a government of law rather than of men. 'Law', in the context of the rule of law, does not mean any law enacted by the legislative authority, howsoever arbitrary or despotic it may be. Otherwise even under a dictatorship it would be possible to say that there is rule of law, because every law made by the dictator howsoever arbitrary and unreasonable has to be obeyed and every action has to be taken in conformity with such law. In such a case too even 10 where the political set up is dictatorial, it is law that governs the relationship between men and men and between men and the State. But still it is not rule, of law as understood in modern jurisprudence, because in jurisprudential terms, the law itself in such a case being an emanation from the absolute will of the dictator it is in effect and substance the rule of man and not of law which prevails in such a situation. What is a necessary element of the rule of law is that the law must not be arbitrary or irrational and it must satisfy the test of reason and the democratic form of polity seeks to ensure this element by making the framers of the law accountable to the people. Of course, in a country like the United Kingdom, where there is no written Constitution imposing fetters on legislative power and providing for judicial review of legislation, it may be difficult to hold a law to be invalid on the ground that it is arbitrary and irrational and hence violative of an essential element of the rule of law and the only remedy if at all would be an appeal to the electorate at the time when a fresh mandate is sought at the election. But the situation is totally different in a country like India which has a written Constitution enacting Fundamental Rights and conferring power on the courts to enforce them not only against the executive but also against the legislature. The Fundamental Rights erect a protective armour for the individual against arbitrary or unreasonable executive or legislative action.
11. There are three Fundamental Rights in the Constitution which are of prime importance and which breathe vitality in the concept of the rule of law. They are Articles 14, 19 and 21 which in the words of Chandrachud, C.J. in Minerva Mills case MANU/SC/0075/1980 : [1981]1SCR206 constitute a golden triangle. It is now settled law as a result of the decision of this Court in Maneka Gandhi's case (supra) that Article 14 enacts primarily a guarantee against arbitrariness and inhibits State action, whether legislative or executive, which suffers from the vice of arbitrariness. This interpretation placed on Article 14 by the Court in Maneka Gandhi's case has opened up a new dimension of that Article which transcends the classificatory principle. For a long time in the evolution of the constitutional law of our country, the courts had construed Article 14 to mean only this, namely, that you can classify persons 45 and things for the application of a law but such classification must be based on intelligible differentia having rational relationship to the object sought to be achieved by the law. But the court pointed out in Maneka Gandhi's case that Article 14 was not to be equated with the principle of classification. It was primarily a guarantee against arbitrariness in State action and the doctrine of classification was evolved only as a subsidiary rule for testing or determining whether a particular State action was arbitrary or not. The Court said "Equality is antithetical to arbitrariness. In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies. One belongs to the rule of law while the other to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article 14." The Court thus laid down that every State action must be non-arbitrary and reasonable; if it is not, the court would strike it down as invalid.
12. This view was reaffirmed by the Court in another outstanding decision in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India and Ors. (1979) 3 CSR 1014 There, tenders were invited by the Airport Authority for giving a contract for running a canteen at they Bombay Airport. The invitation for tender included a condition that the applicant must have at least 5 years' experience as a registered 2nd class hotelier. Several persons tendered. One was a person who had considerable experience in the catering business but he was not a registered 2nd class hotelier as required by the condition in the invitation to tender. Yet his tender was accepted because it was the highest. The contract given to him was challenged and court held that the action of the Airport Authority was illegal. The court pointed out that a new form of property consisting of government largesse in the shape of jobs, contracts, licences, quotas, mineral rights and other benefits and services was emerging in the social welfare State that India was and it was necessary to develop new forms of protection in regard to this new kind of property. The court held that in regard to government largesse, the discretion of the government is not unlimited in that the government cannot give or withhold largesse in its arbitrary discretion or at its sweet will. The government action must be based on standards that are not arbitrary or irrational. This requirement was spelt out from the application of Article 14 as a constitutional requirement and it was held that having regard to the constitutional mandate of Article 14, the Airport Authority was not entitled to act arbitrarily in accepting the tender but was bound to conform to the standards or norms laid down by it. The Court thus reiterated and reaffirmed its commitment against arbitrariness in State action.
13. It can therefore now be taken to be well-settled that if a law is arbitrary or irrational, it would fall foul of Article 14 and would be liable to be struck down as invalid. Now a law may contravene Article 14 because it enacts provisions which are arbitrary : as for example, they make discriminatory classification which is not founded on intelligible differentia having rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the law or they arbitrarily select persons or things for discriminatory treatment. But there is also another category of cases where without enactment of specific provisions which are arbitrary, a law may still offend Article 14 because it confers discretion on an authority to select person or things for application of the law without laying down any policy or principle to guide the exercise of such discretion. Where such unguided and unstructured discretion is conferred on an authority, the law would be violative of Article 14 because it would enable the authority to exercise such discretion arbitrarily and thus discriminate without reason. Unfettered and uncharted discretion conferred on any authority, even if it be the judiciary, throws the door open for arbitrariness, for after all a judge does not cease to be a human being subject to human limitations when he puts on the judicial rove and the nature of the judicial process being what it is, it cannot be entirely free from judicial subjectivism. Cardozo, J. has frankly pointed this out in his lectures on "Nature of the Judicial Process" :
There has been a certain lack of candor in much of the discussion of the theme, or rather perhaps in the refusal to discuss it, as if judges must lose respect and confidence by the reminder that they are subject to human limitations...if there is anything of reality in my analysis of the judicial process, they do not stand aloof on these chill and distant heights; and we shall not help the cause of truth by acting and speaking as if they do. The great tides and currents which engulf the rest of men do not turn aside in their course and pass the judges by.
This facet of the judicial process has also been emphasized by Richard B. Brandt in his book on "Judicial Discretion" where he has said :
Much of law is designed to avoid the necessity for the judge to reach what Holmes called his 'can't helps,' his ultimate convictions or values. The force of precedent, the close applicability of statute law, the separation of powers, legal presumptions, statutes of limitations, rules of pleading and evidence, and above all the pragmatic assessments of fact that point to one result whichever ultimate values be assumed, all enable the judge in most cases to stop short of a resort to his personal standards. When these prove unavailing, as is more likely in the case of courts of last resort at the frontiers of the law, and most likely in a supreme constitutional court, the judge necessarily resorts to his own scheme of values. It may, therefore, be said that the most important thing about a judge is his philosophy; and if it be dangerous for him to have one, it is at all events less dangerous than the self-deception of having none.
That is why Lord Camden described the discretion of a judge to be the law of tyrants; it is always unknown; it is different in different men; it is casual and depends on Constitution, Temper, and Passion.' In the best it is often times Caprice, in the worst it is every Vice, Folly and Passion to which human Nature is liable." Doe d. Hindson v. Kersey (1765) at p. 53 of the pamphlet published in London by J. Wilkes in 1971 entitled "Lord Camden's Genuine Argument in giving Judgment on the Ejectment between Hindson, and others against Kersey." Megarry J. also points out in his delightful book "Miscellany at Law" that "discretion is indeed a poor substitute, for principles, however great the Judge." Therefore, where discretion is conferred on an authority by a statute, the court always strains to find in the statute the policy or principle laid down by the legislature for the purpose of guiding the exercise of such discretion and, as pointed out by Subba Rao, J. as he then was, the court some times even tries to discover the policy of principle in the crevices of the statute in order to save the law from the challenge of Article 14 which would inevitably result in striking down of the law if the discretion conferred were unguided and unfettered. But where after the utmost effort and intense search, no policy or principle to guide the exercise of discretion can be found, the discretion conferred by the law would be unguided 45 and unstructured, like a tumultuous river overflowing its banks and that would render the law open to attack on ground of arbitrariness under Article 14.
14. So also Article 19 strikes against arbitrary legislation in so far as such legislation is violative of one or the other provision of Clause (1) of that Article. Sub-clauses (a) to (g) of Clause (1) of Article 19 enact various Fundamental freedoms: Sub-clause (1) guarantees freedom of speech and expression, Sub-clause (b), freedom to assemble peacefully and without arms; Sub-clause (c), freedom to form associations or unions; Sub-clause (d), freedom to move freely throughout the territory of India; Sub-clause (e), to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India and Sub-clause (g), freedom to practise any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. There was originally Sub-clause (f) in Clause (1) of Article 19 which guaranteed freedom to acquire, hold, and dispose of property but that sub-clause was deleted by the Constitution (Forty fourth Amendment) Act 1978. Now the freedoms guaranteed under these various sub-clauses of Clause (1) of Article 19 are not absolute freedoms but they can be restricted by law, provided such law satisfies the requirement of the applicable provision in one or the other of Clauses (2) to (6) of that Article. The common basic requirement of the saving provision enacted in Clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19 is that the restriction imposed by the law must be reasonable. If, therefore, any law is enacted by the legislature which violates one or the other provision of Clauses (1) of Article 19, it would not be protected by the saving provision enacted in Clauses (2) to (6) of that Article, if it is arbitrary or irrational, because in that event the restriction imposed by it would a fortiori be unreasonable.
15. The third Fundamental Right which strikes against arbitrariness in State action is that embodied in Article 21. This Article is worded in simple language and it guarantees the right to life and personal liberty in the following terms.
21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law.
This Article also came up for interpretation in Maneka Gandhi's case (supra). Two questions arose before the Court in that case: one was as to what is the content of the expression "personal liberty" and the other was as to what is the meaning of the expression "except according to procedure established by law." We are not concerned here with) the first question and hence I shall not dwell upon it. But so far as second question is concerned? it provoked a decision from the Court which was to mark the beginning of a most astonishing development of the law. It is with this decision that the Court burst forth into unprecedented creative activity and gave to the law a new dimension and a new vitality. Until this decision was given, the view held by this Court was that Article 21 merely embodied a facet of the Diceyian concept of the rule of law that no one can be deprived of his personal liberty by executive action unsupported by law. It was 35 intended to be no more than a protection against executive action which had no authority of law. If there was a law which provided some sort of procedure, it was enough to deprive a person of his life or personal liberty. Even if, to take an example cited by S.R. Das, J. in his Judgment in A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras MANU/SC/0012/1950 : 1950CriLJ1383 the law provided that the Bishop of Rochester be boiled in oil, it would be valid under Article 21. But in Maneka Gandhi's case (supra) which marks a watershed in the history of development of constitutional law in our country, this Court for the first time took the view that Article 21 affords protection not only against executive action but also against legislation and any law which deprives a person of his life or personal liberty would be invalid unless it prescribes a procedure for such deprivation which is reasonable fair and just. The concept of reasonableness, it was held, runs through the entire fabric of the Constitution and it is not enough for the law merely to provide some semblance of a procedure but the procedure for depriving a person of his" life or personal liberty must be reasonable, fair and just. It is for the court to determine whether in a particular case the procedure is reasonable, fair and just and if it is not, the court will strike down the law as invalid. If therefore a law is enacted by the legislature which deprives a person of his life-and 'life' according to the decision of this Court in Francis Coralie Mullen's v. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0517/1981 : 1981CriLJ306 would include not merely physical existence but also/the use of any faculty or limb as also the right to live with human dignity-or any aspect of his personal liberty, it would offend against Article 21 if the procedure prescribed for such deprivation is arbitrary and unreasonable. The word 'procedure' in Article 21 is wide enough to cover the entire process by which deprivation is effected and that would include not only the adjectival but also the substantive part of the law. Take for example, a law of preventive detention which sets out the grounds, on which a person may be preventively detained. If a person is preventively detained on a ground other than those set out in the law, the preventive detention would obviously not be according to the procedure prescribed by the law, because the procedure set out in the law for preventively detaining a person prescribes certain specific grounds on which alone a person can be preventively detained, and if he is detained on any other ground, it would be violative of Article 21. Every facet of the law which deprives a person of his life or personal liberty would therefore have to stand the test of reasonableness, fairness and justness in order to be outside the inhibition of Article 21.
16. It will thus be seen that the rule of law has much greater vitality under our Constitution than it has in other countries like the United Kingdom which has no constitutionally enacted Fundamental Rights. The rule of law has really three basic and fundamental assumptions; one is that law making must be essentially in the hands of a democratically elected legislature, subject of course to any power in the executive in an emergent situation to promulgate ordinances effective for a short duration while the legislature is not in session as also to enact delegated legislation in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the legislature; the other is that, even in the hands of a democratically elected legislature, there should not be unfettered legislative power, for, as Jefferson said: "Let no man be trusted with power but tie him down from making mischief by the chains of the Constitution; and lastly there must be an independent judiciary to protect the citizen against excesses of executive and legislative power. Fortunately, whatever uncharitable and irresponsible critics might say when they find a decision of the court going against the view held by them, we can confidently assert that we have in our country all these three elements essential to the rule of law. It is plain and indisputable that under our Constitution law cannot be arbitrary or irrational and if it is, it would be clearly invalid, whether under Article 14 or Article 19, 40 or Article 21, whichever be applicable.
17. It is in the light of these constitutional provisions that I must consider whether death penalty provided under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 Sub-section (3) of the CrPC is constitutionally valid. Now one thing is certain that the Constitution does not in so many terms prohibit capital punishment. In fact, it recognises death sentence as one of the penalties which may be imposed by law. Article 21 provides inter alia that no one shall be deprived of his life except according to procedure established by law and this clearly postulates that a person may be deprived of his life in accordance with the procedure, which, of course, according to the decision of this Court in Maneka Gandhi's case (supra) must be reasonable, fair and just procedure, for inflicting death penalty on a person depriving him of his life. Clause (c) of Article 72 also recognises the possibility of a sentence of death being imposed on person convicted of an offence inasmuch as it provides that the President shall have the power to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person who is convicted of an offence and sentenced to death. It is therefore not possible to contend that the imposition of death sentence for conviction of an offence is in all cases forbidden by the Constitution. But that does not mean that the infliction of death penalty is blessed by the Constitution or that it has the imprimatur or seal of approval of the Constitution. The Constitution is not a transient document but it is meant to endure for a long time to come and during its life, situations may arise where death penalty may be found to serve a social purpose and its prescription may not be liable to be regarded as arbitrary or unreasonable and therefore to meet such situations, the Constitution had to make a provision and this it did in Article 21 and Clause (c) of Article 72 so that, even where death penalty is prescribed by any law and it is otherwise not unconstitutional, it must still comply with the requirement of Article 21 and it would be subject to the clemency power of the President under Clause (c) of Article 72. The question would however still remain whether the prescription of death penalty by any particular law is violative of any provision of the Constitution and is therefore rendered unconstitutional. This question has to be answered in the present case with reference to Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 Sub-section (3) of the CrPC.
18. Now in order to answer this question it is necessary first of all to examine the legislative trend in our country so far as the imposition of death penalty is concerned. A "brief survey of the trend of legislative endeavors will, as pointed out by Krishna Iyer, J. in Rajendra Prasad v. State of U.P. (1979) 3 SCR 646 "serve to indicate whether! the people's consciousness has been projected towards narrowing or widening the scope for infliction of death penalty." If we look at the legislative history of the relevant provisions of the Indian Penal 30 Code and the CrPC, we find that in our country there has been a gradual shift against the imposition of death penalty. The legislative development, through several successive amendments has shifted the punitive center of gravity from life taking to life sentence. Sub-section (5) of Section 367 of the CrPC 1898 as it stood prior to its amendment by Act 26 of 1955 provided:
If the accused is convicted of an offence punishable with death, and the court sentences to any punishment other than death, the court shall in its judgment state the reasons why sentence of death. was not passed.
This provision laid down that if an accused was convicted of an offence punishable with death, the imposition of death sentence was the rule and the awarding of a lesser sentence was an exception and the court had to state the reasons for not passing the sentence of death. In other words, the discretion was directed positively towards death penalty. But, by the Amending Act 26 of 1955 which came into force with effect from 1st January 1956, this provision was deleted with the result that from and after that date, it was left to the discretion of the court on the facts of each case to pass a sentence of death or to award a lesser sentence. Where the court found in a given case that, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the death was not called for or there were extenuating circumstances to justify the passing of the lesser sentence, the court would award the lesser sentence and not impose the death penalty. Neither death penalty nor life sentence was the rule under the law as it stood after the abolition of Sub-section (5) of Section 367 by the Amending Act 26 of 1955 and the court was left "equally free to award either sentence." But then again, there was a further shift against death penalty by reason of the abolitionist pressure and when the new CrPC 1973, was enacted, Section 354 Sub-section (3) provided:
When the conviction is for a sentence punishable with death or, in the alternative, with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded and. in the case of sentence of death special reasons for such sentence.
The court is now required under this provision to state the reasons for the sentence awarded and in case of sentence of death, special reasons are required to be stated. It will thus be seen that life sentence is now the rule and it is only in exceptional cases, for special reasons,, that death sentence can be imposed. The legislature has however not indicated what are the special reasons for which departure can be made from the normal rule and death penalty may be inflicted. The legislature has not given any guidance as to what are those exceptional cases in which, deviating from the normal rule, death sentence may be imposed. This is left entirely to the unguided discretion of the court, a feature, which, in my opinion, has lethal consequences so far as the constitutionality of death penalty is concerned. But one thing is clear that through these legislative changes the disturbed conscience of the State on the question of legal threat to life by way of death sentence has sought to express itself legislatively," the stream of tendency being towards cautious abolition.
19. It is also interesting to note that a further legislative attempt towards restricting and rationalising death penalty was made in the late seventies. A Bill called Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill 1972 for amending Section 302 was passed by the Rajya Sabha in 1978 and it was pending in the Lok Sabha at the time when Rajendra Prasad's case was decided and though it ultimately lapsed with the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, it shows how strongly were the minds of the elected representatives of the people agitated against "homicidal exercise of discretion" which is often an '"obsession with retributive justice in disguise." This Bill sought to narrow drastically the judicial discretion to imposing death penalty and tried to formulate the guidelines which should control the exercise of judicial exercise in this punitive area. But unfortunately the Bill though passed by the Rajya Sabha could not see its way through the Lok Sabha and was not enacted into law. Otherwise perhaps the charge against the present section of 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 Sub-section (3) of the CrPC that it does not indicate any policy or principle to guide the exercise of judicial discretion in awarding death penalty, would have been considerably diluted, though even then, I doubt very much whether that section could have survived the attack against its constitutionality on the ground that it still leaves the door open for arbitrary exercise of discretion in imposing death penalty.
20. Having traced the legislative history of the relevant provisions in regard to death penalty, I will now turn my attention to what great and eminent man have said in regard to death penalty, for their words serve to bring out in bold relief the utter barbarity and futility of the death penalty. Jaiprakash Narain, the great humanist, said, while speaking on abolition of death penalty:
To my mind, it is ultimately a question of respect for life and human approach to those who commit grievous hurts to others. Death sentence is no remedy for such crimes. A more humane and constructive remedy is to remove the culprit concerned from the normal milieu and treat him as a mental case. I am sure a large proportion of the murderers could be weaned away from their path and their mental condition sufficiently improved to become useful citizens. In a minority of cases, this may not be possible. They may be kept in prison houses till they die a natural death. This may cast a heavier economic burden on society than hanging. But I have no doubt that a humane treatment even of a murderer will enhance man's dignity and make society more human,
Andrei Sakharov in a message to the Stockholm Conference on Abolition of Death Penalty organised by Amnesty International in 1978 expressed himself firmly against death penalty:
I regard the death penalty as a savage and immoral institution which undermines the moral and legal foundations of a society. A State, in the person of its functionaries, who like all people are inclined to making superficial conclusions, who like all people are subject to influence, connections, prejudices and egocentric motivations for their behaviour, takes upon itself the right to the most terrible and irreversible act-the deprivation of life. Such a State cannot expect an improvement of the moral atmosphere in its country. I reject the notion that the death penalty has any essential deterrent effect on potential offenders. I am convinced that the contrary is true-that savagery begets only savagery.... I am convinced that society as a whole and each of its members individually, not just the person who comes before the courts, bears a responsibility for the occurrence of a crime.... I believe that the death penalty has no moral or practical justification and represents a survival of barbaric customs of revenge. Bloodthirsty and calculated revenge with no temporary insanity on the part of the judges, and therefore, shameful and disgusting.
Tolstoy also protested against death sentences in an article "I Cannot be Silent."
Twelve of those by whose labour we live the very men whom we have depraved and are still depraving by every means in our power from the poison of vodka to the terrible falsehood of a creed we impose on them with all our might, but do not ourselves believe in-twelve of those men strangled with cords by those whom the feed and clothe and house, and who have depraved and still continue to deprave them. Twelve husbands, fathers, and sons, from among those upon whose kindness, industry, and simplicity alone rests the whole of Russian life, are seized, imprisoned, and shackled. Then their hands are tied behind their backs lest they should seize the ropes by which they are to be hung, and they are led to the gallows.
So also said Victor Hugo in the spirit of the Bishop created by him in his 'Les Miserables':
We shall look upon crime as a disease. Evil will be treated in charity instead of anger. The change will be simple and sublime. The cross shall displace the scaffold, reason is on our side, feeling is on our side, and experience is on our side.
Mahatma Gandhi also wrote to the same effect in his simple but inimitable style:
Destruction of individuals can never be a virtuous act. The evildoers cannot be done to death. Today there is a movement afoot for the abolition of capital punishment and attempts are being made to convert prisons into hospitals as if they are persons suffering from a disease.
This Gandhian concept was translated into action with commendable success in the case of Chambal dacoits who laid down their arms in response to the call of Vinobha Bhave and Jaiprakash Narayan. See "Crime and Non-violence" by Vasant Nargolkar. There is also the recent instance of surrender of Malkhan Singh, a notorious dacoit of Madhya Pradesh., Have these dacoits not been reformed? Have they not been redeemed and saved? What social purpose would have been served by killing them?
21. I may also at this stage make a few observations in regard to the barbarity and cruelty of death penalty, for the problem of constitutional validity of death penalty cannot be appreciated in its proper perspective without an adequate understanding of the true nature of death penalty and what it involves in terms of human anguish and suffering. In the first place, death penalty is irrevocable; it cannot be recalled. It extinguishes the flame of life for ever and is plainly destructive of the right to life, the most precious right of all, a right without which enjoyment of no other rights is possible. It silences for ever a living being and dispatches him to that 'undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller returns' nor, once executed, 'can storied urn or animated bust back to its mansion call the fleeting breath.' It is by reasons of its cold and cruel finality that death penalty is qualitatively different from all other forms of punishment. If a person is sentenced to imprisonment, even if it be for life, and subsequently it is found that he was innocent and was wrongly convicted, he can be set free. Of course, the imprisonment that he has suffered till then cannot be undone and the time he has spent in the prison cannot be given back to him in specie but he can come back and be restored to normal life with his honour vindicated, if he is found innocent. But that is not possible where a person has been wrongly convicted and sentenced to death and put out of existence In pursuance of the sentence of death. In his case, even if any mistake is subsequently discovered, it will be too late; in every way and for every purpose it will be too late, for he cannot be brought back to life. The execution of the sentence of death in such a case makes miscarriage of justice irrevocable. On whose conscience will this death of an innocent man lie? The State through its judicial instrumentality would have killed an innocent man. How is it different from a private murder? That is why Lafavatte said: "I shall ask for the abolition of the penalty of death until I have the infallibility of human judgment demonstrated me."
22. It is argued on behalf of the retentions that having regard to the elaborate procedural safeguards enacted by the law in cases involving capital punishment, the possibility of mistake is more imaginary than real and these procedural safeguards virtually make conviction of an innocent person impossible. But I do not think this argument is well founded. It is not supported by factual data. Hugo Bedau in his well known book, "The Death Penalty in America" has individually documented seventy four cases since 1893 in which it has been responsibly charged and in most of them proved "beyond doubt, that persons were wrongly convicted of criminal homicide in America. Eight out of these seventy four, though innocent, were executed. Redin, Gardener, Frank and others have specifically identified many more additional cases. These are cases in which it has been possible to show discovery of subsequent facts that the convictions were erroneous and innocent persons were put to death, but there may be many more cases where by reason of the difficulty of uncovering the facts after conviction, let alone after execution, it may not be possible to establish that there was miscarriage of justice. The jurist Olivecroix, applying a calculus of probabilities to the chance of judicial error, concluded as far back as in 1860 that approximately one innocent man was condemned out of every 257 cases. The proportion seems low but only in relation to moderate punishment. In relation to capital punishment, the proportion is infinitively high. When Huge wrote that he preferred to call the guillotine Lesurques (the name of an innocent man guillotined in the Carrier de Lyon case) he did not mean that every man who was decapitated was a Lesurques, but that one Lesurques was enough to wipe out the value of capital punishment forever. It is interesting to note that where cases of wrongful execution have come to public attention, they have been a major force responsible for bringing about abolition of death penalty. The Evans case in England in which an innocent man was hanged in 1949 played a large role in the abolition of capital punishment in that country. Belgium also abjured capital punishment on account of one such judicial error and so did Wisconsin,, Rhode Island and Maine in the United States of America.
23. Howsoever careful may be the procedural safeguards erected by the law before death penalty can be imposed, it is impossible to eliminate the chance of judicial error. No possible judicial safeguards can prevent conviction of the innocent. Students of the criminal process have identified several reasons why innocent men may be convicted of crime. In the first place, our methods of investigation are crude and archaic. We are, by and large, ignorant of modern methods of investigation based on scientific and technological advances. Our convictions are based largely on oral evidence of witnesses. Often, witnesses perjure themselves as they are motivated by caste, communal and factional considerations. Some times they are even got up by the police to prove what the police believes to be a true case. Sometimes there is also-mistaken eye witness identification, and this evidence is almost always difficult to shake in cross-examination. Then there is also the possibility of a frame up of innocent men by their enemies. There are also cases where an over zealous prosecutor may fail to disclose evidence of innocence known to him but not known to the defence. The possibility of error in judgment cannot therefore be ruled out on any theoretical considerations. It is indeed a very live possibility and it is not at all unlikely that so long as death penalty remains a constitutionally valid alternative, the court or the State acting through the instrumentality of the court may have on its conscience the blood of an innocent man.
24. Then again it is sometimes argued that, on this reasoning, every criminal trial must necessarily raise the possibility of wrongful conviction and if that be so, are we going to invalidate every form of punishment? But this argument, I am afraid, is an argument of despair. There is a qualitative difference between death penalty and other forms of punishment. I have already pointed out that the former extinguishes the flame of life altogether and is irrevocable and beyond recall while the latter can, at least to some extent beset right, if found mistaken. This vital difference between death penalty and imprisonment was emphasized by Mahatma Gandhi when he said, in reply to a German writer :
I would draw distinction between killing and detention and even corporal punishment. I think there is a difference not merely in quantity but also in quality. I can recall the punishment of detention. I can make reparation to the man upon whom J inflict corporal punishment. But once a man is killed, the punishment is beyond recall or reparation.
The same point was made by the distinguished criminologist Leon Radzinowicz when he said : "The likelihood of error in a capital sentence case stands on a different footing altogether." Judicial error in imposition of death penalty would indeed be a crime beyond punishment. This is the drastic nature of death penalty, terrifying in its consequences, which has to be taken into account in determining its constitutional validity.
25. It is also necessary to point out that death penalty is barbaric and inhuman in its effect, mental and physical upon the condemned man and is positively cruel. Its psychological effect on the prisoner in the Death Row is disastrous. One Psychiatrist has described Death Row as a "grisly laboratory" "the ultimate experimental stress in which the condemned prisoner's personality is incredibly brutalised." He points out that "the strain of existence on Death Row is very likely to produce...acute psychotic breaks." Vide the article of West on Medicine and Capital Punishment." Some inmates are driven to ravings or delusions but the majority sink into a sort of catatonic numbness under the over-whelming stress." Vide "The case against Capital Punishment" by the Washington Research Project. Intense mental suffering is inevitably associated with confinement, under sentence of death. Anticipation of approaching death can and does produce stark terror. Vide article on ''Mental Suffering under Sentence of Death." 57 Iowa Law Review 814. \Justice Brennan in his opinion in Furman v. Georgia 408 US 238 gave it as a reason for holding the capital punishment to be unconstitutional that mental pain is an inseparable part of our practice of punishing criminals by death, for the prospect of pending execution exacts a frightful toll 35 during the inevitable long wait between the imposition of sentence and the actual infliction of death." Krishna Iyer, J. also pointed out in Rajendra Prasad's case (supra) that because the condemned prisoner had "the hanging agony hanging over his head since 1973 (i.e. for six years) "he must by now be more a vegetable than a person." He added that "the excruciation of long pendency of the death sentence with the prisoner languishing near-solitary suffering all the time, may make the death sentence unconstitutionally cruel and agonising." The California Supreme Court also, in finding the death penalty per se unconstitutional remarked with a sense of poignancy :
The cruelty of capital punishment lies not only in the execution It self and the pain incident thereto, but also in the dehumanizing effects of the lengthy imprisonment prior to execution during which the judicial and administrative procedures essential to due process of law are carried out. Penologists and medical experts agree that the process of carrying out a verdict of death is often so degrading and brutalizing to the human spirit as to constitute psychological torture.
In Re Kemmler 136 us 436 the Supreme Court of the United States accepted that "punishments are cruel when they involve a lingering death, something more than the mere extinguishment of life." Now a death would be as lingering if a man spends several years in a death cell awaiting execution as it would be if the method of execution takes an unacceptably long time to kill the victim. The pain of mental lingering can be as intense as the agony of physical lingering. See David Pannick on "Judicial Review of the Death Penalty." Justice Miller also pointed out in Re Medley 134 US 160 that "when a prisoner sentenced by a court to death is confined to the penitentiary awaiting the execution of the, sentence, one of the most horrible feelings to which he can be subjected during that time is the uncertainty during the whole of it...as to the precise time when his execution shall take place." He acknowledged that such uncertainty is inevitably 'accompanied by an immense mental anxiety amounting to a great increase of the oflender's punishment.'
26. But quite apart from this excruciating mental anguish and severe psychological strain which the condemned prisoner has to undergo on account of the long wait from the date when the sentence of death is initially passed by the sessions court until it is confirmed by the High Court and then the appeal against the death sentence is disposed of by the Supreme Court and if the appeal is dismissed, then until the clemency petition is considered by the President and if it is turned down, then until the time appointed for the actual execution of the sentence of death arrives, the worst time for most of the condemned prisoners would be the last few hours when all certainty is gone and the moment of death is known. Dostoyevsky who actually faced a firing squad only to be reprieved at the last instant, described this experience in the following words :
...the chief and the worst pain is perhaps not inflicted by wounds, but by your certain knowledge that in an hour, in ten minutes, in half a minute, now this moment your soul will fly out of your body, and that you will be a human being no longer, and that that's certain-the main thing is that it is certain.... Take a soldier and put him in front of a cannon in battle and fire at him and he will still hope, but read the same soldier his death sentence for certain, and he will go mad or burst out crying. Who says that human nature is capable of bearing this without madness? Why this cruel, hideous, unnecessary and useless mockery? Possibly there are men who have sentences of death read out to them and have been given time to go through this torture, and have then been told, You can go now, you've been reprieved. Such men could perhaps tell us. It was of agony like this and of such horror that Christ spoke. No. you can't treat a man like that !
We have also accounts of execution of several prisoners in the United States which show how in these last moment condemned prisoners often simply disintegrate. Canns has in frank and brutal language bared the terrible psychological cruelly of capital punishment :
Execution is not simply death. It is just as different in essence, from the privation of life as a concentration camp is from prison.... It adds to death a rule, a public premeditation known to the future victim, an organisation, in short, which is in itself a source of moral sufferings more terrible than death. For there to be equivalence, the death penalty would have to punish a criminal who had warned his victim of the date at which he would inflict a horrible death on him and who, from that moment onward, had confined him at his mercy for months. Such a monster is not encountered in private life.
There can be no stronger words to describe the utter depravity and inhumanity of death sentence.
27. The physical pain and suffering which the execution of the sentence of death involves is also no less cruel and inhuman. In India, the method of execution followed is hanging by the rope. Electrocution or application of lethal gas has not yet taken its place as in some of the western countries. It is therefore with reference to execution by hanging that I must consider whether the sentence of death is barbaric and inhuman as entailing physical pain and agony. It is no doubt true that the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment 1949-53 found that hanging is the most humane method of execution and so also in Ichikawa v. Japan, 13 the Japanese Supreme Court held that execution by hanging does not correspond to 'cruel punishment' inhibited by Article 36 of the Japanese Constitution. But whether amongst all the methods of execution, hanging is the most humane or in the view of the Japanese Supreme Court, hanging is not cruel punishment within the meaning of Article 36, one thing is clear that hanging is undoubtedly accompanied by intense physical torture and pain. Warden Duffy of San Quentin, a high security prison in the United States of America, describes the hanging process with brutal frankness in lurid details:
The day before an execution the prisoner goes through a harrowing experience of being weighed, measured for length of drop to assure breaking of the neck, the size of the neck, body measurements et cetera. When the trap springs he dangles at the end of the rope. There are times when the neck has not been broken and the prisoner strangles to death. His eyes pop almost out of his head, his tongue swells and protrudes from his mouth, his neck may be broken, and the rope many times takes large portions of skin and flesh from the side of the face that the noose is on. He urinates, he defecates, and droppings fall to the floor while witnesses look on, and almost all executions one or more faint or have to be helped out of the witness room. The prisoner remains dangling from the rope for from 8 to 14 minutes before the doctor, who has climbed up a small ladder and listens to his heart beat with a stethoscope, pronounces him dead. A prison guard stands at the feet of the hanged person and holds the body steady, because during the first few minutes there is usually considerable struggling in an effort to breathe.
If the drop is too short, there will be a slow and agonising death by strangulation. On the other hand, if the drop is too long, the head will be torn off. In England centuries of practice have produced a detailed chart relating a man's weight and physical condition to the proper length of drop, but even there mistakes have been made. In 1927, a surgeon who witnessed a double execution wrote:
The bodies were cut down after fifteen minutes and placed in an antechamber, when I was horrified to hear one of the supposed corpses give a gasp and find him making respiratory efforts, evidently a prelude to revival. The two bodies were quickly suspended again for a quarter of an hour longer.... Dislocation of the neck is the ideal aimed at, but, out of all my post-mortem findings, that has proved rather an exception, which in the majority of instances the cause of death was strangulation and asphyxin.
These passages clearly establish beyond doubt that the execution of sentence of death by hanging does involve intense physical pain and suffering, though it may be regarded by some as more humane than electrocution or application of lethal gas.
28. If this be the true mental and physical effect of death sentence on the condemned prisoner and if it causes such mental anguish, psychological strain and physical agony and suffering, it is difficult to see how it can be regarded as anything but cruel and inhuman. The only answer which can be given for justifying this infliction of mental and physical pain and suffering is that the condemned prisoner having killed a human being does not merit any sympathy and must suffer this punishment because he 'deserves' it. No mercy can be shown to one who did not show any mercy to others. But, as I shall presently point out, this justificatory reason cannot commend itself to any civilised society because it is based on the theory of retribution or retaliation and at the bottom of it lies the desire of the society to avenge itself against the wrong doer. That is not a permissible penological goal.
29. It is in the context of this background that the question has to be considered whether death penalty provided under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 Sub-section (3) of the CrPC is arbitrary and irrational, for if it is, it would be clearly violative of Articles 14 and 21. I am leaving aside for the moment challenge to death penalty under Article 19 and confining myself only to the challenge under Article 14 and 21. So far as this challenge is concerned, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners contended that the imposition of death penalty under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 354 Sub-section (3) of the CrPC was arbitrary and unreasonable, firstly because it was cruel and inhuman, disproportionate and excessive, secondly because it was totally unnecessary and did not serve any social purpose or advance any constitutional value and lastly because the discretion conferred on the court to award death penalty was not guided by any policy or principle laid down by the legislature but was wholly arbitrary. The Union of India as also the States supporting it sought to counter this argument of the petitioners by submitting first that death penalty is neither cruel nor inhuman, neither disproportionate nor excessive, secondly, that it does serve a social purpose inasmuch as it fulfils two penological goals namely, denunciation the community and deterrence and lastly, that the judicial discretion in awarding death penalty is not arbitrary and the court can always evolve standards or norms for the purpose of guiding the exercise of its discretion in this punitive area. These were broadly the rival contentions urged on behalf of the parties and I shall now proceed to examine them in the light of the observations made in the preceding paragraph.
30. The first question that arises for consideration on these contentions is and that is a vital question which may well determine the fate of this challenge to the constitutional validity of death penalty-on whom does the burden of proof lie in a case like this? Does it lie on the petitioners to show that death penalty is arbitrary and unreasonable on the various grounds urged by them or does it rest on the State to show that death penalty is not arbitrary or unreasonable and serves a legitimate social purpose. This question was debated before us at great length and various decisions were cited supporting one view or the other. The earliest decision relied on was that of Saghir Ahmed v. State of Uttar Pradesh MANU/SC/0110/1954 : [1955]1SCR707 where it was held by this Court that if the petitioner succeeds in showing that the impugned law ex facie abridges or transgresses the rights coming under any of the sub-clauses of Clause (1) of Article 19, the onus shifts on the respondent State to show that the legislation comes within the permissible limits authorised by any of Clauses (2) to (6) as may be applicable to the case, and also to place material before the court in support of that contention. If the State fails to discharge this burden, there is no obligation on the petitioner to prove negatively that the impugned law is 10 not covered by any of the permissive clauses. This view as to the onus of proof was reiterated by this Court in Khyerbari Tea Co. v. State of Assam MANU/SC/0048/1963 : [1964]5SCR975 . But, contended the respondents, a contrary trend was noticeable in some of the subsequent decisions of this Court and the respondents relied principally on the decision in B. Banerjee v. Anita Pan MANU/SC/0449/1974 : [1975]2SCR774 where Krishna Iyer, J. speaking on behalf of himself and Beg, J. as he then was, recalled the following statement of the law from the judgment of this Court in Ram Krishna Dalmia v. S.R. Tendolkar and Ors.: 1959 SCR 297
there is always a presumption in favour of the constitutionality of an enactment and the burden is upon him who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression of the constitutional principles;" and
that it must be presumed that the legislature understands and correctly appreciates the need of its own people, that its laws are directed to problems made manifest by experience and that its discriminations are based on adequate grounds.