MANU/SC/0426/1991
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 2750 of 1991
Decided On: 19.07.1991
Appellants:Bangalore Medical Trust
Vs.
Respondent: B.S. Muddappa and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
T.K. Thommen and R.M. Sahai, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: B.R.L. Iyengar, S.S. Javali, R.V. Narasimhamurthi, E.C. Vidya Sagar and G.V. Shantharaju, Advs
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Property
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Bangalore Development Authority (amendment) Act, 1991 - Section 2, Bangalore Development Authority (amendment) Act, 1991 - Section 3; Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 15, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 16, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 16(2), Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 16(l), Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 17, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 18, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 19, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 19(4), Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 2, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 2(b), Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 2(bb), Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 23, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 23(1), Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 3, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 30, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 31, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 32, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 33, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 38, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 38A, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 65, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 76, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 8, Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 - Section 9
Cases Referred:
Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0249/1990; Kharak Singh vs. The State of U.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0085/1962; Municipal Council, Ratlam vs. Vardichan and Ors. MANU/SC/0171/1980; Francis Coralie Mullin vs. Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0517/1981; Olga Tellis and Ors. vs. Bombay Municipal Corporation and Ors. MANU/SC/0039/1985; State of Himachal Pradesh and Ors. vs. Umed Ram Sharma and Ors. MANU/SC/0125/1986; Vikram Deo Singh Tomar vs. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0572/1988; T. Damodhar Rao and Ors. vs. The Special Officer, Municipal Corporation of Hyderabad and Ors. MANU/AP/0222/1987; S.P. Gupta vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0080/1981; Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) represented by its Assistant General Secretary on behalf of the Association vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0058/1980
Relevant Section:
BANGALORE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 1976 - Section 65
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.9.1989 of the Karnataka High Court in W.A. No. 162 of 1989
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Case Note:

Constitution - allocation of land - Bangalore Development Act, 1976 - Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) allotted open space in favour of appellant for construction of hospital - site had been earlier reserved for public park or playground - allotment challenged by residents of locality on ground of being contrary to provisions of Act and legislative intent to protect and preserve environment - Supreme Court observed that scheme of allocation is legitimate exercise of statutory power to protect residents from ill effects of urbanisation - sacrificing public park is invalid and colourable exercise of power at expense of general public - protection of environment is to be taken care in development scheme - entire proceedings before State Government suffered from absence of jurisdiction - exercise of power was ultra vires - Order of conversion of land from public park to private nursing home is null and void.
Citing Reference:

Dissented
  3

Mentioned
  15

ORDER
Authored By : T.K. Thommen, R.M. Sahai
T.K. Thommen, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of my learned Brother Sahai, J. and I am in complete agreement with what he has stated. It is in support of his reasoning and conclusion that I add the following words.
3. A site near the Sankey's Tank in Rajmahal Vilas Extension in the City of Bangalore was reserved as an open space in an improvement scheme adopted under the City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945. This Act was repealed by Section 76 of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act No. 12 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the "Act") which received the assent of the Governor on 2.3.1976 and is deemed to have come into force on 20.12.1975. By a notification issued under Section 3 of the Act, the Government constituted the Bangalore Development Authority (the "BDA") thereby attracting Section 76 which, so far as it is material, reads:
Section 76. REPEAL AND SAVINGS (1) On the issue of the notification under Sub-section (1) of Section 3 constituting the Bangalore Development Authority, the City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945 (Mysore Act 5 of 1945) shall stand repealed.
(2) ...
(3) ...
Provided further that anything done or any action taken (including any appointment, notification, rule, regulation, order, scheme or bye-law made or issued, any permission granted) under the said Act shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act:
Provided also that any reference in any enactment or in any instrument to any provision of the repealed Act shall unless a different intention appears be construed as a reference to the corresponding provision of this Act.
(4) ....
(emphasis supplied)
Accordingly, the scheme prepared under the repealed enactment is deemed to have been prepared and duly sanctioned by the Government in terms of the Act for the development of Rajmahal Vilas Extension. In the scheme so sanctioned the open space in question has been reserved for a public park.
4. However, pursuant to the orders of the State Government dated 27.5.1976 and 11.6.1976 and by its resolution dated 14.7.1976, the BDA allotted the open space in favour of the appellant, a medical trust, for the purpose of constructing a hospital. This site is stated to be the only available space reserved in the scheme for a public park or play ground. This allotment has been challenged by the writ petitioners (respondents in this appeal) who are residents of the locality on the ground that it is contrary to the provisions of the Act and the scheme sanctioned thereunder, and the legislative intent to protect and preserve the environment by reserving open space for 'ventilation', recreation and play grounds and parks for the general public. The writ petitioners, being aggrieved as members of the general public and residents of the locality, have challenged the diversion of the user and allotment of the site to private persons for construction of a hospital.
5. The learned Single Judge who heard the writ petition in the first instance found no merit in it and dismissed the same. He held that, a hospital being a civic amenity, the allotment of the site by the BDA in favour of the present appellant for the purpose of constructing a hospital was valid and in accordance with law. On appeal by the respondents (the residents of the locality) the learned Judges of the Division Bench held that, the area having been reserved in the sanctioned scheme for a public park, its diversion from that object and allotment in favour of a private body was not permissible under the Act, even if the object of the allotment was the construction of a hospital. The learned Judges were not impressed by the argument that the proposed hospital being a civic amenity, the Act did not prohibit the abandonment of a public park for a private hospital. Accordingly, allowing the respondents' appeal and without prejudice to a fresh allotment by the BDA of any alternative site in favour of the present appellant, according to law, the writ petition was allowed and the allotment of the site in question was set aside.
6. The appellant's counsel submits that the learned Judges of the Division Bench exceeded their jurisdiction in setting aside an allotment which was purely an administrative action taken by the BDA pursuant to a valid direction issued by the Government in that behalf. He submits that in the absence of any evidence of mala fide the impugned decision of the BDA was impeccable and not liable to be interfered with in writ jurisdiction. He says that the decision to allot a site for a hospital rather than a park is a matter within the discretion of the BDA. The hospital, he says, is not only an amenity, but also a civic amenity under the Act, as it now stands, and the diversion of the user of the land for that purpose is justified under the Act.
7. The respondents, on the other hand, contend that it was improper to confer a largesse on a private party at the expense of the general public. The special consideration extended to the appellant, they say, was not permissible under the Act. To have allotted in favour of the appellant an area reserved for a public park, even if it be for the purpose of constructing a hospital, was to sacrifice the public interest in preserving open spaces for 'ventilation', recreation and protection of the environment.
8. The scheme is undoubtedly statutory in character. In view of the repealing provisions contained in Section 76 of the Act, which we have in part set out above, the impugned actions affecting the scheme will be examined with reference to the Act. The validity of neither the Act nor the scheme is doubted. The complaint of the writ petitioners (respondents) is that the scheme has been violated by reason of the impugned orders. The scheme, they point out, is a legitimate exercise of statutory power for the protection of the residents of the locality from the ill effects of urbanisation, and the impugned orders sacrificing open space reserved for a public park is an invalid and colourable exercise of power to suit private interest at the expense of the general public.
9. The Act, as enacted in 1976, has undergone several changes, but the definition of 'amenity' in Clause (b) of Section 2 remains unchanged. 'Amenity' includes various 'conveniences' such as road, drainage, lighting etc. and such other conveniences as are notified as such by the Government.
10. Section 2 was amended in 1984 by Karnataka Act No. 17 of 1984 to add Clause (bb), after Clause (b), which distinguished a 'civic amenity' from an 'amenity'. Certain amenities were specified as civic amenities, such as dispensaries, maternity homes etc. and those amenities which are notified as civic amenities by the Government.
11. By Act 11 of 1988, Clause (bb) of Section 2 was, w.e.f. 21.4.1984, substituted by the present clause which defines a civic amenity as, amongst others, a dispensary, a hospital, a pathological laboratory, a maternity home and such other amenity as the Government may by notification, specify. Clauses (b) and (bb) of Section 2 read together show that all chose conveniences which are enumerated, or, notified by the Government under Clause (b), are 'amenities'; and, all those amenities which are enumerated, or, notified by the Government under Clause (bb), are 'civic amenities'.
12. Significantly, a hospital is specifically stated to be a 'civic amenity". The concept of 'amenity' under Clause (b), however, remains unchanged. It is not clear from Sub-clause (i) of Clause (bb) whether a hospital which is not run by the Government or a civic 'Corporation' but, as in the present case, by a private body, would qualify as 'civic amenity". Nor is it clear whether a hospital was either an 'amenity' or a 'civic amenity" until it was specifically stated to be the latter by the Amendment Act 11 of 1988. The respondents (residents) contend that a hospital did not have the status of an 'amenity' and much less a 'civic amenity' until Act 11 of 1988 so stated. But perhaps the appellant rightly contends that Act 11 of 1988 was merely clarificatory of what was always the position, and the hospital has always been regarded as an 'amenity', if not a 'civic amenity'. However, on the facts of this case, it is unnecessary to pursue this point further. Nor is it necessary to consider whether a privately owned and managed hospital, as in the present case, is an 'amenity' for the purpose of the Act.
13. The question really is whether an open space reserved for a park or play ground for the general public, in accordance with a formally approved and published development scheme in terms of the Act, can be allotted to a private person or a body of persons for the purpose of constructing a hospital? Do the members of the public, being residents of the locality, have a right to object to such diversion of the user of the space and deprivation of a park meant for the general public and for the protection of the environment? Are they in law aggrieved by such diversion and allotment? To ascertain these points, we must first look at the relevant provisions of the Act.
14. Chapter III of the Act deals with 'development schemes'. The BDA is empowered to draw up detailed schemes for the development of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. It may, with the previous approval of the Government, undertake from time to time any work for such development and incur expenditure therefore. The Government is also empowered to require the BDA to take up any development scheme or work and execute the same, subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the Government (See Section 15). Section 16 provides that such development schemes must provide for various matters, such as acquisition of land, laying and re-laying of land, construction and reconstruction of buildings, formation and alteration of streets, drainage, water supply and electricity. In 1984 this section was amended by Act 17 of 1984 by inserting Clause (d) so as to provide for compulsory reservation of portions of the layout for public parks and play grounds and also for civic amenities. Section 16(l)(d) provides:
Section 16. PARTICULARS TO BE PROVIDED FOR IN A DEVELOPMENT SCHEME-Every development scheme under Section 15: (1) shall, within the limits of the area comprised in the scheme, provide for:
(d) the reservation of not less than fifteen per cent of the total area of the layout for public parks and play grounds and an additional area of not less than ten percent of the total area of the layout for civic amenities.
This provision thus treats 'public parks and play grounds' as a different and separate amenity or convenience from a 'civic amenity'. 15% and 10% of the total area of the layout must respectively be reserved for (1) public parks and play grounds, and, (2) for civic amenities. The extent of the areas reserved for these two objects are thus separately and distinctly stated by the statute. The implication of this conceptual distinction is that land reserved for a public park and play ground cannot be utilised for any 'civic amenity' including a hospital.
Section 16(2) says:
Section 16(2) may, within the limits aforesaid, provide for-
(a) ...
(b) forming open spaces for the better ventilation of the area comprised in the scheme or any adjoining area;
(c) ...
The need for open space for 'better ventilation' of the area is thus emphasised by this provision. One of the main objects of public parks or play grounds is the promotion of the health of the community by means of 'ventilation' and recreation. It is the preservation of the quality of life of the community that is sought to be protected by means of these regulations.
15. Section 17 lays down the procedure to be followed on completion of a development scheme. It deals with, amongst other things, the method of service of notice on affected parties. Section 18 deals with the procedure for sanctioning the scheme. The BDA must submit to the Government the scheme together with the particulars such as plans, estimates, details of land to be acquired etc. and also representations, if any, received from persons affected by the scheme. On consideration of the proposed scheme, the Government is empowered under Sub-section (3) of Section 18 to accord its sanction for the scheme.
16. Section 19 says that when necessary sanction is accorded by the Government, it should publish in the Official Gazette a declaration as to the sanction accorded and the land proposed to be acquired for the scheme. Sub-section (4) of Section 19 says:
19(4) If at any time it appears to the Authority that an improvement can be made in any part of the scheme, the Authority may alter the scheme for the said purpose and shall subject to the provisions of Sub-sections (5) and (6), forthwith proceed to execute the scheme as altered.
This means that the BDA may, subject to certain restrictions contained in Sub-sections (5) and (6), alter the scheme, but such alteration has to be carried out pursuant to a formal decision duly recorded in the manner generally followed by a body corporate. The scheme is a statutory instrument which is administrative legislation involving a great deal of general law-making of universal application, and it is not, therefore, addressed to individual cases of persons and places. Alteration of the scheme must be for the purpose of improvement and better development of the City of Bangalore and adjoining areas and for general application for the benefit of the public at large. Any alteration of the scheme with a view to conferring a benefit on a particular person, and without regard to the general good of the public at large, is not an improvement contemplated by the section. See the principle stated in Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Limited and Anr. etc. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0249/1990 : [1990]1SCR909 , et. seq.
17. Section 30 has not been amended, and, so far as it is material, reads:
30. STREETS ON COMPLETION TO VEST IN AND BE MAINTAINED BY CORPORATION-
(1) ...
(2) Any open space including such parks and play grounds as may be notified by the Government reserved for ventilation in any part of the area under the jurisdiction of the Authority as part of any development scheme sanctioned by the Government shall be transferred on completion to the Corporation for maintenance at the expense of the Corporation and shall thereupon vest in the Corporation.
(3) ...
(emphasis supplied)
Sub-section (2) of this section thus refers to open space, including parks and play grounds, notified by the Government as reserved for 'ventilation'. Section 31 prohibits transfer by sale or otherwise of sites for the purpose of construction of buildings until all the improvements specified in Section 30, including parks and play grounds, have been provided for in the estimates. Section 32 prohibits any person from forming any extension or layout for the purpose of construction of buildings without specific sanction of the BDA. Section 33 has empowered the Commissioner of the BDA to order alteration or demolition of buildings constructed otherwise than in conformity with the sanction of the BDA. These provisions have not undergone any material change.
18. Chapter V of the Act deals with property and finance of the BDA. Section 38 reads:
38. POWER OF AUTHORITY TO LEASE, SELL OR TRANSFER PROPERTY-Subject to such restrictions, conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Authority shall have power to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which belongs to it, and to appropriate or apply any land vested in or acquired by it for the formation of open spaces or for building purposes or in any other manner for the purpose of any development scheme.
(emphasis supplied)
This section also has not undergone any material change. It says that, subject to such restrictions, conditions etc., as may be prescribed, the BDA has the power to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which belongs, to it, and to appropriate or apply any land vested in it or acquired by it for the formation of 'open spaces' or for building purposes or in any other manner for the purpose of any development scheme. This implies that land once appropriated or applied or earmarked by formation of 'open spaces' or for building purposes or other development in accordance with a duly sanctioned scheme should not be used for any other purpose unless the scheme itself, which is statutory in character, is formally altered in the manner that the BDA as a body corporate is competent to alter. This section, of course, empowers the BDA to lease or sell or otherwise transfer any property. But that power has to be exercised consistently with the appropriation or application of land for formation of 'open spaces' or for building purposes or any other development scheme sanctioned by the Government. Property reserved for open space in a duly sanctioned scheme cannot be leased or sold away unless the scheme itself is duly altered. Any unauthorised deviation from the duly sanctioned scheme by sacrificing the public interest in the preservation and protection of the environment by means of open space for parks and play grounds and 'ventilation' will be contrary to the legislative intent, and an abuse of the statutory power vested in the authorities. That this is the true legislative intent is left in no doubt by the subsequent amendment by Act 17 of 1984, inserting Section 38A, which reads:
38A. PROHIBITION OF THE USE OF AREA RESERVED FOR PARKS, PLAY GROUNDS AND CIVIC AMENITIES FOR OTHER PURPOSES-The authority shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any area reserved for public parks and play grounds and civic amenities, for any other purpose and any disposition so made shall be null and void.
(emphasis supplied)
This amendment of 1984, which came into force on 17.4.84, is merely clarificatory of what has always been the legislative intent. The new provision clarifies that it shall not be open to the BDA to dispose of any area reserved for public parks and play grounds and civic amenities. Any such site cannot be diverted to any other purpose. Any action in violation of this provision is null and void.
19. The legislative intent to prevent the diversion of the user of an area reserved for a public park or play ground or civic amenity is reaffirmed by the Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1991 (Karnataka Act No. 18 of 1991) which came into force w.e.f. 16.1.1991, and which substituted a new Section 38A in the place of the earlier provision inserted by Act 17 of the 1984. Section 2 of the Karnataka Act 18 of 1991 reads:
Section 2 Substitution of Section 38A-For Section 38A of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the twenty first day of April, 1984, namely:
38A. Grant of area reserved for civic amenities etc: (1) The Authority shall have the power to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any area reserved for civic amenities for the purpose for which such area is reserved.
(2) The Authority shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any area reserved for public parks and playgrounds and civic amenities, for any other purpose and any disposition so made shall be null and void-
Provided that where the allottee commits breach of any of the conditions of allotment, the Authority shall have right to resume such site after affording an opportunity of being heard to such allottee'.
This new Section 38A, as clarified in the Statement of Objects and Reasons and in the Explanatory Statement attached to L.A. Bill No. 6 of 1991, removed the prohibition against lease or sale or any other transfer of any area reserved for a civic amenity, provided the transfer is for the same purpose for which the area has been reserved. This means that once an area has been stamped with the character of a particular civic amenity by reservation of that area for such purpose, it cannot be diverted to any other use even when it is transferred to another party. The rationale of this restriction is that the scheme once sanctioned by the Government must operate universally and the areas allocated for particular objects must not be diverted to other objects. This means that a site for a school or hospital or any other civic amenity must remain reserved for that purpose, although the site itself may change hands. This is the purpose of Sub-section (1) of Section 38A, as now substituted. Sub-section (2) of Section 38A, on the other hand, emphasises the conceptual distinction between 'public parks and play grounds' forming one category of 'space' and 'civic amenities' forming another category of sites. While public parks and play grounds cannot be parted with by the BDA for transfer to private hands by reason of their statutory dedication to the general public, other areas reserved for civic amenities may be transferred to private parties for the specific purposes for which those areas are reserved. There is no prohibition, as such, against transfer of open spaces reserved for public parks or play grounds, whether or not for consideration, but the transfer is limited to public authorities and their user is limited to the purposes for which they are reserved under the scheme. The distinction is that while public parks and play grounds are dedicated to the public at large for common use, and must therefore remain with the State or its instrumentalities, such as the BDA or a Municipal Corporation or any other authority, the civic amenities are not so dedicated, but only reserved for particular or special purposes. This restriction against allotment of public parks and play grounds is further emphasised by Section 3 of the Karnataka Act 18 of 1991 which reads:
Section 3. Validation of allotment of civic amenity sites- Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, any allotment of civic amenity site by way of sale, lease or otherwise made by the authority after the twenty-first day of April, 1984, and before the Seventh day of May, 1988 for the purposes specified in Clause (bb) of Section 2 of the principal Act, shall, if such site has been made use of for the purpose for which it is allotted, be deemed to have been validly made and shall, have effect for all purposes as if it had been made under the principal Act, as amended by this Act and accordingly:
(i) all acts or proceedings, or things done or allotment made or action taken by the Authority shall, for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law; and
(ii) no suit or other proceedings shall be instituted, maintained or continued in any court or before any authority for cancellation of such allotment or demolition of buildings constructed on the sites so allotted after obtaining building licences from the Authority or the (local authority concerned or for questioning the validity of any action or) things taken or done under Section 38A of the principal Act, as amended by this Act and no court shall enforce or recognise any decree or order declaring any such allotment made, action taken or things done under the principal Act, as invalid.
The evil that was sought to be remedied by the validation provision is in regard to allotment of "civic amenity sites", and not public parks or play grounds (see also the Explanatory Statement attached to the Bill). All these provisions unmistakably point to the legislative intent to preserve a public park or public play ground in the hands of the general public, as represented by the BDA or any other public authority, and thus prevent private hands from grabbing them for private ends. It must also be stated here that the validation clause relates to the period between 21.4.1984 and 7.5.1988 which was long after the impugned allotment.
20. Section 65 empowers the Government to give such directions to the BDA as are, in its opinion, necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of the Act. It is the duty of the BDA to comply with such directions. It is contended that the BDA is bound by all directions of the Government, irrespective of the nature or purpose of the directions. We do not agree that the power of the Government under Section 65 is unrestricted. The object of the directions must be to carry out the object of the Act and not contrary to it. Only such directions as are reasonably necessary or expedient for carrying out the object of the enactment are contemplated by Section 65. If a direction were to be issued by the Government to lease out to private parties areas reserved in the scheme for public parks and play grounds, such a direction would not have the sanctity of Section 65. Any such diversion of the user of the land would be opposed to the statute as well as the object in constituting the BDA to promote the healthy development of the city and improve the quality of life. Any repository of power-be it the Government or the BDA must act reasonably and rationally and in accordance with law and with due regard to the legislative intent.
21. It is contended on behalf of the appellant that Section 38A prohibiting sale or any other disposal of land reserved for 'public parks or play grounds', and Section 16(l)(d) requiring that 15 per cent of the total area of the layout be reserved for public parks and play grounds, and an additional area of not less than ten per cent of the total area of the layout for civic amenities, were enacted subsequent to the relevant orders of the Government dated 27.5.1976 and 11.6.1976 and the resolution of the BDA dated 14.7.76 resulting in the allotment of the site in favour of the appellant. Counsel says that at the material time when the Government made these orders and the BDA acted upon them there was no restriction on the diversion of the user of land reserved for a public park or play ground to any other purpose.
22. Significantly, the original scheme, duly sanctioned under the Act, includes a public park and the land in question has been reserved exclusively for that purpose. Although it is open to the BDA to alter the scheme, no alteration has been made in the manner contemplated by Section 19(4). It is, however, true that certain steps had been taken by the Government and the BDA to allot the open space in question to the appellant. My learned brother Sahai, J. has referred to the letter dated 21st April, 1976 addressed by the Chairman of the BDA to the Chief Minister and the endorsement made by the Chief Minister on that letter as well as the Orders of the Government dated 27th May, 1976 and 11th June, 1976 sanctioning conversion of the low level park into a civic amenity site and allotting the same to the appellant. These orders were followed by a resolution adopted by the BDA on 14th July, 1976 reading as follows:
393. Allotment of C.A. Site to Bangalore Medical Trust for construction of Hospital in Rajmahal vilas Extension.
It was resolved-
'The Government Order No. HMA 249 MNG 76 Bangalore dt. 17.6.1976 regarding allotment of C.A. site situated next to the land allotted to H.K.E. Society in Rajmahal vilas Extension, Bangalore, in favour of Bangalore Medical Trust for construction of Hospital to read and recorded with confirmation for further action in the matter'.
These documents leave no doubt that the action of the Government and the BDA resulting in the resolution dated 14th July, 1976 have been inspired by individual interests at the costs and to the disadvantage of the general public. Public interest does not appear to have guided the minds of the persons responsible for diverting the user of the open space for allotment to the appellant. Conversion of the open space reserved for a park for the general good of the public into a site for the construction of a privately owned and managed hospital for private gains is not an alteration for improvement of the scheme as contemplated by Section 19, and the impugned orders in that behalf are a flagrant violation of the legislative intent and a colourable exercise of power. In the circumstances, it has to be concluded that no valid decision has been taken to alter the scheme. The scheme provides for a public park and the land in question remains dedicated to the public and reserved for that purpose. It is not disputed that the only available space which can be utilised as a public park or play ground and which has been reserved for that purpose is the space under consideration.
23. The scheme is meant for the reasonable accomplishment of the statutory object which is to promote the orderly development of the City of Bangalore and adjoining areas and to preserve open spaces by reserving public parks and play grounds with a view to protecting the residents from the ill-effects of urbanisation. It is meant for the development of the city in a way that maximum space is provided for the benefit of the public at large for recreation, enjoyment, 'ventilation' and fresh air. This is clear from the Act itself as it originally stood. The amendments inserting Sections 16(l)(d), 38A and other provisions are clarificatory of this object. The very purpose of the BDA, as a statutory authority, is to promote the healthy growth and development of the City of Bangalore and the area adjacent thereto. The legislative intent has always been the promotion and enhancement of the quality of life by preservation of the character and desirable aesthetic features of the city. The subsequent amendments are not a deviation from or alteration of the original legislative intent, but only an elucidation or affirmation of the same.
24. Protection of the environment, open spaces for recreation and fresh air, play grounds for children, promenade for the residents, and other conveniences or amenities are matters of great public concern and of vital interest to be taken care of in a development scheme. It is that public interest which is sought to be promoted by the Act by establishing the BDA. The public interest in the reservation and preservation of open spaces for parks and play grounds cannot be sacrificed by leasing or selling such sites to private persons for conversion to some other user. Any such act would be contrary to the legislative intent and inconsistent with the statutory requirements. Furthermore, it would be in direct conflict with the constitutional mandate to ensure that any State action is inspired by the basic values of individual freedom and dignity and addressed to the attainment of a quality of life which makes the guaranteed rights a reality for all the citizens. See Kharak Singh v. The State of U.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0085/1962 : 1963CriLJ329 ; Municipal Council, Ratlam v. Shri Vardhichand and Ors. MANU/SC/0171/1980 : 1980CriLJ1075 ; Francis Coralie Mullin v. The Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0517/1981 : 1981CriLJ306 ; Olga Tellis and Ors. v. Bombay Municipal Corporation and Ors. MANU/SC/0039/1985 : AIR1986SC180 ; State of Himachal Pradesh and Anr. v. Umed Ram Sharma and Ors. MANU/SC/0125/1986 : [1986]1SCR251 and Vikram Deo Singh Tomar v. State of Bihar, MANU/SC/0572/1988 : AIR1988SC1782 .
25. Reservation of open spaces for parks and play grounds is universally recognised as a legitimate exercise of statutory power rationally related to the protection of the residents of the locality from the ill-effects of urbanisation.