MANU/SC/0053/2012
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Appeal Nos. 7503-7537 of 2002
Decided On: 24.01.2012
Appellants: Bangalore Development Authority
Vs.
Respondent: The Air Craft Employees Cooperative Society Ltd. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
G.S. Singhvi and A.K. Ganguly, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Altaf Ahmed, Sr. Adv., S.K. Kulkarni, M. Gireesh Kumar, Ankur S. Kulkarni and Vijay Kumar, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: K.K. Venugopal, P. Vishwanatha Shetty, Sr. Advs., E.C. Vidya Sagar, Srinivas, Vijay Kumar L. Paradeshi, Brahmajeet Mishra, R.S. Hegde, Chandra Prakash, Amit Kumar Wadhwa, Ashwani Garg, Rahul Tyagi, Advs. for P.P. Singh, Sanjay R. Hegde and Bina Gupta, Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964 - Section 16; Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 265, Constitution Of India - Article 266, Constitution Of India - Article 300A; Income Tax Act, 1961 - Section 90; Karnataka Health Cess Act, 1962 - Section 3, Karnataka Health Cess Act, 1962 - Section 4, Karnataka Health Cess Act, 1962 - Section 4A; Karnataka Prohibition Of Beggary Act, 1975 - Section 31; Karnataka Public Libraries Act, 1965 - Section 30; Slum Areas (improvement And Clearance) Act, 1956 - Section 19(1)
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 14; Constitution of India - Article 265
Cases Referred:
Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar and Ors. MANU/SC/0024/1958 : AIR 1958 SC 538; Jyoti Pershad v. The Administrator for The Union Territory of Delhi MANU/SC/0079/1961 : AIR 1961 SC 1602; Devi Das Gopal Krishnan v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0305/1967 : AIR 1967 SC 1895; State of Kerala v. Travancore Chemicals and Manufacturing Company MANU/SC/0704/1998 : (1998) 8 SCC 188; Commissioner, Bangalore Development Authority v. State of Karnataka MANU/KA/0502/2005 : ILR 2006 KAR 318; Bondu Ramaswamy v. Bangalore Development Authority MANU/SC/0334/2010 : (2010) 7 SCC 129; Padma Sundara Rao v. State of T.N. (2003) 5 SCC 533; Charanjit Lal Chowdhuri v. Union of India MANU/SC/0009/1950 : (1950) 1 SCR 869; Middleton v. Texas Power and Light Company 248 U.S. 152, 157; M.H. Quareshi v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0027/1958 : (1959) 1 SCR 629; R.K. Garg v. Union of India MANU/SC/0074/1981 : (1981) 4 SCC 675; Municipal Board, Hapur v. Raghuvendra Kripal and Ors. (1966) 1 SCR 950; Corporation of Calcutta and Anr. v. Liberty Cinema MANU/SC/0026/1964 : (1965) 2 SCR 477; Bhavesh D. Parish and Ors. v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0392/2000 : (2000) 5 SCC 471; Daymond v. South West Water Authority (1976) 1 All ELR 39; State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar MANU/SC/0033/1952 : (1952) SCR 284; A.N. Parasuraman and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0007/1990 : (1989) 4 SCC 683; Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0042/1960 : ( 1961) 3 SCR 77; Ajoy Kumar Banerjee v. Union of India MANU/SC/0263/1984 : (1984) 3 SCC 127; Maharashtra State Board of S.H.S.E. v. Paritosh Bhupeshkumar Sheth MANU/SC/0055/1984 : (1984) 4 SCC 27; Kishan Prakash Sharma v. Union of India MANU/SC/0210/2001 : (2001) 5 SCC 212; Union of India v. Azadi Bachao Andolan MANU/SC/1219/2003 : (2004) 10 SCC 1; Kewal Krishan Puri v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0029/1979 : (1980) 1 SCC 416; Southern Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals, Trichur and Ors. v. State of Kerala and Ors. MANU/SC/0088/1981 : (1981) 4 SCC 391; Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v. Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Shirur Mutt MANU/SC/0136/1954 : (1954) SCR 1005; Sreenivasa General Traders v. State of A.P. MANU/SC/0278/1983 : (1983) 4 SCC 353; Kishan Lal Lakhmi Chand v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0788/1993 : 1993 Supp (4) SCC 461; Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti v. Orient Paper & Industries Ltd. MANU/SC/0580/1995 : (1995) 1 SCC 655; Mahant Sri Jagannath Ramanuj Das v. State of Orissa MANU/SC/0137/1954 : (1954) SCR 1046; Ratilal Panachand Gandhi v. State of Bombay MANU/SC/0138/1954 : (1954) SCR 1055; H.H. Sadhundra Thirtha Swamiar v. Commissioner for Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments MANU/SC/0388/1962 : 1963 Supp (2) SCR 302; Om Parkash Agarwal v. Giri Raj Kishori MANU/SC/0029/1986 : (1986) 1 SCC 722; I.T.C. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka MANU/SC/0007/1985 : 1985 (Supp) SCC 476
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.04.2001 of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in Writ Petition Nos. 11144 of 1993, c/w 13436-13439 of 1990, 30409, 30527, 33689 of 1994, 13907, 35884, 38988-41725-41726 of 1995, 1760, 2194-2195 of 1996, W.P. 769, 8111, 21784, 22311 of 1996, 15664, 24186-24187, 27098-27104 of 1997, 6993, 19134, 21973, 25833 of 1998 and 8526 of 1999 (MANU/KA/1090/2001)
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  16

Mentioned
  14

Relied On
  3

Case Note:
Constitution - Validity of provisions - Section 32(5A) of Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (1976 Act); Mysore Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 (Town Planning Act); Articles 14 and 265 of Constitution of India, 1950 - Appeals against order of Division Bench of Karnataka High Court, whereby writ Petitions filed by Respondents were allowed, Section 32(5A) of 1976 Act was declared as violative of Article 14 of Constitution, void and inoperative and conditions incorporated in orders passed by Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) sanctioning residential layout plans or work orders in terms of which, Respondents were required to pay/deposit various charges/sums specified therein were quashed and a direction was issued for refund of amount - Whether Section 32(5A) of 1976 Act was violative of Article 14 of Constitution - Whether Section 32(5A) of 1976 Act suffered from vice of excessive delegation of legislative power - Whether demand of charges under Cauvery Scheme etc. amounted to tax and was, therefore, ultra vires provisions of Article 265 of Constitution - Whether BDA had collected charges from house building societies and allottees of sites of layouts prepared by it far in excess of its contribution towards Cauvery Scheme, MRTS, etc. - Held, in impugned order, Division Bench recorded brief reasons for negating Respondents' challenge to Notification dated 1st March, 1988 - Conclusion recorded by Division Bench and similar view expressed by Another Division Bench of High Court in case of Commissioner, Bangalore Development Authority v. State of Karnataka would be deemed to have been approved by three Judge Bench of this Court in case of Bondu Ramaswamy v. Bangalore Development Authority, which referred to Notifications dated 1st November, 1965 and 13th march, 1984 issued under Section 4A(1) of Town Planning Act and Notification dated 1st March, 1988 issued under Section 2(c) of 1976 Act and observed that intention of State Government was to declare entire area declared under Notification dated 1st November, 1965 and Notification dated 13th march, 1984, together as Bangalore Metropolitan Area - Notification dated 1st March, 1988 clearly stated that, entire area situated within boundaries indicated in Schedule II to Notification dated 13th march, 1984 was area for purpose of Section 2(c) of 1976 Act - In view of judgment in Bondu Ramaswamy v. Bangalore Development Authority, villages specified in schedules appended to Notifications dated 1st November, 1965 and 13th march, 1984 form part of Bangalore Metropolitan Area - Question whether BDA had lost territorial jurisdiction over area in which House Building Societies had formed layouts need not be decided because Respondents did not challenge observations made by Division Bench of High Court - High Court committed serious error by recording a finding that Section 32 (5A) of 1976 Act was discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of Constitution - While deciding issue relating to constitutionality of Section, High Court overlooked well-established principle that, a statutory provision was presumed to be constitutionally valid unless, proved otherwise and burden laid upon person who alleged discrimination to lay strong factual foundation to prove that provision offended equality clause enshrined in Constitution - Though, in writ Petitions filed by them, Respondents pleaded that Section 32 (5A) was discriminatory - But, no factual foundation was laid in support of this plea and in absence of such foundation, High Court was not at all justified in recording a conclusion that impugned provision was violative of equality clause contained in Article 14 of Constitution - While examining issue of hostile discrimination in context of Section 32(5A), Court could not be oblivious of fact that due to unprecedented increase in population of Bangalore City and policy decision taken by State Government to encourage house building societies to form private layouts, BDA was obliged to take effective measures to improve civic amenities within Bangalore Metropolitan Area and for this it became necessary to augment resources by BDA itself or through other State agencies/instrumentalities by making suitable contribution - There could be no justification to transfer burden of said expenditure on residents of areas which were already part of city of Bangalore - Other residents could not be called upon to share burden of cost of amenities largely meant for newly developed areas - Therefore, it was not possible to approve view taken by High Court that by restricting scope of loading burden of expenses to allottees of sites in layouts developed after 1987, legislature violated Article 14 of Constitution - While examining challenge to constitutionality of a statutory provision on ground of excessive delegation, Court must look into policy underlying particular legislation and this could be done by making a reference to Preamble, objects sought to be achieved by particular legislation and scheme thereof and that Court would not sit over wisdom of legislature and nullify provisions under which power to implement particular provision was conferred upon executive authorities - Basic object of two enactments was to ensure planned development of areas which formed part of Bangalore Metropolitan Area as on 15.12.1975 and other adjacent areas which may be notified by Government from time to time - BDA was under an obligation to provide 'amenities' as defined in Section 2(b) and 'civic amenities' as defined in Section 2(bb) of 1976 Act for entire Bangalore Metropolitan Area - In exercise of powers vested in it under Sections 15 and 16, BDA could prepare detailed schemes for development of Bangalore Metropolitan Area and incur expenditure for implementing those schemes, which were termed as development schemes - Expenditure incurred by BDA in implementation of development schemes could be loaded on beneficiaries of development schemes - In terms of Section 32(5A) of 1976 Act, BDA had been vested with power to call upon Applicants desirous of forming new extensions or layouts or private streets to pay a specified sum in addition to sums referred to in Section 32 (5) of Act, to meet a portion of expenditure incurred for execution of any scheme or work for augmenting water supply, electricity, roads, transportation and other amenities - Apart from Preamble and objects of 1961 and 1976 Acts and scheme of two enactments, expression 'such portion of expenditure as Authority may determine towards execution of any scheme or work for augmenting water supply, electricity, roads, transportation and such other amenities' supplied sufficient guidance for exercise of power by BDA under Section 32(5A) - It could not be said that, Section conferred unbridled and uncanalised power upon BDA to demand an unspecified amount from those desirous of forming private layouts - Exercise of power by BDA under Section 32(5A) of Act, was always subject to directions which could be given by State Government under Section 65 of Act - It could not have been possible for legislature to make provision for effective implementation of provisions contained in 1961 and 1976 Acts for development of Bangalore Metropolitan Area and this task had to be delegated to some other agency/instrumentality of State - Section 32 (5A) of Act, did not suffer from vice of excessive delegation and legislative guidelines could be traced in Preamble of 1961 and 1976 Acts and object and scheme of two legislations - If conditions imposed by BDA requiring Respondents to pay for augmentation of water supply, electricity, transport, etc. were scrutinized in light of principles laid down in cases of Sreenivasa General Traders v. State of A.P., Kishan Lal Lakhmi Chand v. State of Haryana and I.T.C. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka, it could not be said that, demand made by BDA amounted to levy of tax and was ultra vires Article 265 of Constitution - Under 1976 Act, BDA was obliged to provide different types of amenities to population of Bangalore Metropolitan Area including allottees of sites in layouts prepared by house building societies - It was possible that, they might not be direct beneficiaries of one or other amenities made available by BDA, but this could not detract from fact that, they would certainly be benefited by construction of Outer Ring Road and Intermediate Ring Road, Mass Rapid Transport System, etc. - They would also be ultimate beneficiaries of Cauvery Scheme because availability of additional 270 MLD water to Bangalore would enable BWSSB to spare water for private layouts - Thus, charges demanded by BDA under Section 32(5A) of Act, could not be termed as tax and declared unconstitutional on ground that, same were not sanctioned by law enacted by competent legislature - It was not necessary to adjudicate controversy, because in written arguments filed on behalf of BDA, it had been categorically stated that, Government had to take a decision about pending demands and Court might issue appropriate direction in matter, which BDA would comply - Ends of justice would be served by directing State Government to take appropriate decision in light of communication dated 3rd May, 2005 - High Court had not assigned any reason for declaring levy of these charges to be illegal - Therefore, that part of impugned order could not be sustained - Nevertheless, State Government should take appropriate decision in matter of levy of these charges as well and determine whether same were disproportionate to expenses incurred by it, BDA or any other agency/instrumentality of State - Impugned order was set aside - Appeals allowed
Industry: Aviation
JUDGMENT
G.S. Singhvi, J.
1. These appeals are directed against the order of the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court whereby the writ petitions filed by the Respondents were allowed, Section 32(5A) of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (for short, 'the 1976 Act') was declared as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, void and inoperative and the conditions incorporated in the orders passed by the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) sanctioning residential layout plans or work orders in terms of which Respondents were required to pay/deposit various charges/sums specified therein were quashed and a direction was issued for refund of the amount.
2. With the formation of the new State of Mysore, it was considered necessary to have a uniform law for planned growth of land use and development and for the making and execution of town planning schemes. Therefore, the State Legislature enacted the Mysore Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 (for short, 'the Town Planning Act'). The objectives of that Act were:
(i) to create conditions favourable for planning and replanning of the urban and rural areas in the State of Mysore, with a view to providing full civic and social amenities for the people in the State;
(ii) to stop uncontrolled development of land due to land speculation and profiteering in land;
(iii) to preserve and improve existing recreational facilities and other amenities contributing towards balanced use of land; and
(iv) to direct the future growth of populated areas in the State, with a view to ensuring desirable standards of environmental health and hygiene, and creating facilities for the orderly growth of industry and commerce, thereby promoting general standards of living in the State.
3. The State of Mysore was renamed Karnataka in 1973. Thereupon, necessary consequential changes were made in the nomenclature of various enactments including the Town Planning Act.
4. Section 4 of the Town Planning Act envisages constitution of a State Town Planning Board by the State Government. By Act No. 14 of 1964, the Town Planning Act was amended and Chapter I-A comprising of Sections 4-A to 4-H was inserted. These provisions enabled the State Government to issue notification and declare any area in the State to be a local planning area for the purposes of the Act and constitute the 'Planning Authority' having jurisdiction over that area. Section 9(1) (unamended) imposed a duty on every Planning Authority to carry out a survey of the area within its jurisdiction, prepare and publish an outline development plan for such area and submit the same to the State Government for provisional approval. In terms of Section 12(1) (unamended), an outline development plan was required to indicate the manner in which the development and improvement of the entire planning area was to be carried out and regulated. Section 19(1), as it then stood, contemplated preparation of a comprehensive development plan and submission of the same for the approval of the State Government. Section 21 (unamended) gave an indication of the factors which were to be included in the comprehensive development plan. Section 26 (unamended) imposed a duty on every Planning Authority to prepare town planning schemes incorporating therein the contents specified in Sub-section (1) of that Section. For the sake of reference, these provisions are extracted below:
4-A. Declaration of Local Planning Areas, their amalgamation, sub-division, inclusion of any area in a Local Planning Area.:
(1) The State Government may, by notification, declare any area in the State to be a Local Planning Area for the purposes of this Act, this Act shall apply to such area:
Provided that no military cantonment or part of a military cantonment shall be included in any such area.
4-C. Constitution of Planning Authority. - (1) As soon as may be, after declaration of a local planning area, the State Government in consultation with the Board, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of the performance of the functions assigned to it, an authority to be called the 'Planning Authority' ' of that area, having jurisdiction over that area.
9. Preparation of Outline Development Plan.-(1) Every Planning Authority shall, as soon as may be, carry out a survey of the area within its jurisdiction and shall, not later than two years from the date of commencement of this Act, prepare and publish in the prescribed manner an outline development plan for such area and submit it to the State Government, through the Director, for provisional approval:
Provided that on application made by a Planning Authority, the State Government may from time to time by order, extend the aforesaid period by such periods as it thinks fit.
12. Contents of Outline Development Plan.-(1) An outline development plan shall generally indicate the manner in which the development and improvement of the entire planning area within the jurisdiction of the Planning Authority are to be carried out and regulated. In particular it shall include,-
(a) a general land-use plan and zoning of land-use for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, educational and other public purposes;
(b) proposals for roads and highways;
(c) proposals for the reservation of land for the purposes of the Union, any State, any local authority or any other authority established by law in India;
(d) proposals for declaring certain areas as areas of special control, development in such areas being subject to such Regulations as may be made in regard to building line, height of buildings, floor area ratio, architectural features and such other particulars as may be prescribed;
(e) such other proposals for public or other purposes as may from time to time be approved by the Planning Authority or directed by the State Government in this behalf.
19. Preparation of the Comprehensive Development Plan.-(1) As soon as may be after the publication of the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations under Sub-section (4) of Section 13, but not later than three years from such date, every Planning Authority shall prepare in the prescribed manner a comprehensive Development Plan and submit it through the Director together with a report containing the information prescribed, to the State Government for approval:
Provided that on application made by a Planning Authority, the State Government may, from time to time, by order in writing, extend the aforesaid period by such periods as it thinks fit.
21. Contents of the Comprehensive Development Plan.-(1) The comprehensive Development Plan shall consist of a series of maps and documents indicating the manner in which the development and improvement of the entire planning area within the jurisdiction of the Planning Authority are to be carried out and regulated. Such plan shall include proposals for the following namely:
(a) comprehensive zoning of land-use for the planning area, together with zoning Regulations;
(b) complete street pattern, indicating major and minor roads, national and state high ways, and traffic circulation pattern, for meeting immediate and future requirements;
(c) areas reserved for agriculture, parks, playgrounds and other recreational uses, public open spaces, public buildings and institutions and areas reserved for such other purposes as may be expedient for new civic development;
(d) major road improvements;
(e) areas for new housing;
(f) new areas earmarked for future development and expansion; and
(g) the stages by which the plan is to be carried out.
(2) The report shall further contain a summary of the findings in the surveys carried out under Sub-section (2) of Section 19, and give relevant information and data supporting proposals in the plan and deal in detail with.:
(a) acquisition of land for the purpose of implementing the plan,
(b) financial responsibility connected with the proposed improvements, and
(c) the manner in which these responsibilities are proposed to be met.
26. Making of town planning scheme and its contents.'(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Planning Authority, for the purpose of implementing the proposals in the Comprehensive Development Plan published under Sub-section (4) of Section 22, may make one or more town planning schemes for the area within its jurisdiction or any part thereof.
(2) Such town planning scheme may make provisions for any of the following matters namely,'
(a) the laying out or re-laying out of land, either vacant or already built upon;
(b) the filling up or reclamation of low-lying, swamp or unhealthy areas or levelling up of land;
(c) lay-out of new streets or roads; construction, diversion, extension, alteration, improvement and stopping up of streets, roads and communications;
(d) the construction, alteration and removal of buildings, bridges and other structures;
(e) the allotment or reservation of land for roads, open spaces, gardens, recreation grounds, schools, markets, green belts and dairies, transport facilities and public purposes of all kinds;
(f) drainage inclusive of sewerage, surface or sub-soil drainage and sewage disposal;
(g) lighting;
(h) water supply;
(i) the preservation of objects of historical or national interest or natural beauty and of buildings actually used for religious purposes;
(j) the imposition of conditions and restrictions in regard to the open space to be maintained about buildings, the percentage of building area for a plot, the number, size, height and character of buildings allowed in specified areas, the purposes to which buildings or specified areas may or may not be appropriated, the sub-division of plots, the discontinuance of objectionable users of land in any area in reasonable periods, parking space and loading and unloading space for any building and the sizes of projections and advertisement signs;
(k) the suspension, so far as may be necessary for the proper carrying out of the scheme, of any rule, bye- law, Regulation, notification or order, made or issued under any Act of the State Legislature or any of the Acts which the State Legislature is competent to amend;
(l) such other matter not inconsistent with the objects of this Act as may be prescribed.
5. The 1976 Act was enacted by the State legislature in the backdrop of the decision taken at the conference of the Ministers for Housing and Urban Development held at Delhi in November 1971 that a common authority should be set up for the development of Metropolitan Cities. Before the constitution of the BDA, different authorities like the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation, the City Improvement Trust Board, the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board, the Housing Board and the Bangalore City Planning Authority were exercising jurisdiction over the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. Some of the functions of these authorities like development, planning etc. were overlapping and creating avoidable confusion. Not only this, the intervention of multiple authorities was impeding coordinated development of the Metropolitan Area. It was, therefore, considered appropriate that a single authority like the Delhi Development Authority should be set up for the city of Bangalore and areas adjacent thereto which, in due course, would become part of the city. It was also realised that haphazard and irregular growth would continue unless checked by the development authority and it may not be possible to rectify/correct mistakes in the future. For achieving these objectives, the State legislature enacted the 1976 Act. Simultaneously, Section 81-B was inserted in the Town Planning Act for deemed dissolution of the City Planning Authority in relation to the area falling within the jurisdiction of the BDA. The preamble of the 1976 Act and the definitions of 'Authority', 'Amenity', 'Civic amenity', 'Bangalore Metropolitan Area', 'Development', 'Engineering operations', 'Local Authority', 'Means of access' contained in Section 2 thereof are reproduced below:
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Development Authority for the development of the City of Bangalore and areas adjacent thereto and for matters connected therewith
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,:
(a) 'Authority' means the Bangalore Development Authority constituted under Section 3;
(b) 'Amenity' includes road, street, lighting, drainage, public works and such other conveniences as the Government may, by notification, specify to be an amenity for the purposes of this Act;
(bb) 'Civic amenity' means,-
(i) a market, a post office, a telephone exchange, a bank, a fair price shop, a milk booth, a school, a dispensary, a hospital, a pathological laboratory, a maternity home, a child care centre, a library, a gymnasium, a bus stand or a bus depot;
(ii) a recreation centre run by the Government or the Corporation;
(iii) a centre for educational, social or cultural activities established by the Central Government or the State Government or by a body established by the Central Government or the State Government;
(iv) a centre for educational, religious, social or cultural activities or for philanthropic service run by a cooperative society registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) or a society registered under the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Karnataka Act 17 of 1960) or by a trust created wholly for charitable, educational or religious purposes;
(v) a police station, an area office or a service station of the Corporation or the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board or the Karnataka Electricity Board; and
(vi) such other amenity as the Government may, by notification, specify;
(c) 'Bangalore Metropolitan Area' means the area comprising the City of Bangalore as defined in the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949 (Mysore Act 69 of 1949), the areas where the City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945 (Mysore Act 5 of 1945) was immediately before the commencement of this Act in force and such other areas adjacent to the aforesaid as the Government may from time to time by notification specify;
(j) 'Development' with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of building, engineering, or other operations in or over or under land or the making of any material change in any building or land and includes redevelopment;
(k) 'Engineering operations' means formation or laying out of means of access to road;
(n) 'Local Authority' means a municipal corporation or a municipal council constituted or continued under any law for the time being in force;
(o) 'Means of access' includes any means of access whether private or public, for vehicles or for foot passengers, and includes a road;
6. Sections 14, 15, 16, 28-A, 28-B, 28-C, 32(1) to (5A), 65, 65-B 67(1)(a) and (b) of the 1976 Act are also extracted below:
14. Objects of the Authority.- The objects of the Authority shall be to promote and secure the development of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area and for that purpose the Authority shall have the power to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of moveable and immoveable property, whether within or outside the area under its jurisdiction, to carry out building, engineering and other operations and generally to do all things necessary or expedient for the purposes of such development and for purposes incidental thereto.
15. Power of Authority to undertake works and incur expenditure for development, etc.- (1) The Authority may,:
(a) draw up detailed schemes (hereinafter referred to as 'development scheme') for the development of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area; and
(b) with the previous approval of the Government, undertake from time to time any works for the development of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area and incur expenditure therefor and also for the framing and execution of development schemes.
(2) The Authority may also from time to time make and take up any new or additional development schemes,:
(i) on its own initiative, if satisfied of the sufficiency of its resources, or
(ii) on the recommendation of the local authority if the local authority places at the disposal of the Authority the necessary funds for framing and carrying out any scheme; or
(iii) otherwise.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, the Government may, whenever it deems necessary require the Authority to take up any development scheme or work and execute it subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the Government.
16. Particulars to be provided for in a development scheme.- Every development scheme under Section 15,- (1) shall, within the limits of the area comprised in the scheme, provide for,:
(a) the acquisition of any land which, in the opinion of the Authority, will be necessary for or affected by the execution of the scheme;
(b) laying and re-laying out all or any land including the construction and reconstruction of buildings and formation and alteration of streets;
(c) drainage, water supply and electricity;
(d) the reservation of not less than fifteen percent of the total area of the layout for public parks and playgrounds and an additional area of not less than ten percent of the total area of the layout for civic amenities.
(2) may, within the limits aforesaid, provide for,:
(a) raising any land which the Authority may consider expedient to raise to facilitate better drainage;
(b) forming open spaces for the better ventilation of the area comprised in the scheme or any adjoining area;
(c) the sanitary arrangements required;
(3) may, within and without the limits aforesaid provide for the construction of houses.
28-A. Duty to maintain streets etc.- It shall be incumbent on the Authority to make reasonable and adequate provision by any means or measures which it is lawfully competent to use or take, for the following matters, namely,:
(a) the maintenance, keeping in repair, lighting and cleansing of the streets formed by the Authority till such streets are vested in the Corporation; and
(b) the drainage, sanitary arrangement and water supply in respect of the streets formed by the Authority.
28-B. Levy of tax on lands and buildings.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Authority may levy a tax on lands or buildings or on both, situated within its jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as the property tax) at the same rates at which such tax is levied by the Corporation within its jurisdiction.
(2) The Provisions of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977) shall mutatis mutandis apply to the assessment and collection of property tax.
Explanation.- For the purpose of this section 'property tax' means a tax simpliciter requiring no service at all and not in the nature of fee inquiring service.
28-C. Authority is deemed to be a Local Authority for levy of cesses under certain Acts.- Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being force the Authority shall be deemed to be a local authority for the purpose of levy and collection of,:
(i) education cess under Sections 16, 17 and 17A of the Karnataka Compulsory Primary Education Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 9 of 1961);
(ii) health cess under Sections 3, 4 and 4A of the Karnataka Health Cess Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 28 of 1962);
(iii) library cess under Section 30 of the Karnataka Public Libraries Act, 1965 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1965); and
(iv) beggary cess under Section 31 of the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary Act, 1975 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1975).
32. Forming of new extensions or layouts or making new private streets.- (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any law for the time being in force, no person shall form or attempt to form any extension or layout for the purpose of constructing buildings thereon without the express sanction in writing of the Authority and except in accordance with such conditions as the Authority may specify:
Provided that where any such extension or layout lies within the local limits of the Corporation, the Authority shall not sanction the formation of such extension or layout without the concurrence of the Corporation:
Provided further that where the Corporation and the Authority do not agree on the formation of or the conditions relating to the extension or layout, the matter shall be referred to the Government, whose decision thereon shall be final.
(2) Any person intending to form an extension or layout or to make a new private street, shall send to the Commissioner a written application with plans and sections showing the following particulars,:
(a) the laying out of the sites of the area upon streets, lands or open spaces;
(b) the intended level, direction and width of the street;
(c) the street alignment and the building line and the proposed sites abutting the streets;
(d) the arrangement to be made for levelling, paving, metalling, flagging, channelling, sewering, draining, conserving and lighting the streets and for adequate drinking water supply.
(3) The provisions of this Act and any rules or bye- laws made under it as to the level and width of streets and the height of buildings abutting thereon shall apply also in the case of streets referred to in Sub-section (2) and all the particulars referred to in that Sub-section shall be subject to the approval of the Authority.
(4) Within six months after the receipt of any application under Sub-section (2), the Authority shall either sanction the forming of the extension or layout or making of street on such conditions as it may think fit or disallow it or ask for further information with respect to it.
(5) The Authority may require the applicant to deposit, before sanctioning the application, the sums necessary for meeting the expenditure for making roads, side-drains, culverts, underground drainage and water supply and lighting and the charges for such other purposes as such applicant may be called upon by the Authority, provided the applicant also agrees to transfer the ownership of the roads, drains, water supply mains and open spaces laid out by him to the Authority permanently without claiming any compensation therefor.
(5A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Authority may require the applicant to deposit before sanctioning the application such further sums in addition to the sums referred to in the Sub-section (5) to meet such portion of the expenditure as the Authority may determine towards the execution of any scheme or work for augmenting water supply, electricity, roads, transportation and such other amenities within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area.
65. Government's power to give directions to the Authority.- The Government may give such directions to the Authority as in its opinion are necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act, and it shall be the duty of the Authority to comply with such directions.
65-B. Submission of copies of resolution and Government's power to cancel the resolution or order.- (1) The Commissioner shall submit to the Government copies of all resolutions of the Authority.
(2) If the Government is of opinion that the execution of any resolution or order issued by or on behalf of the Authority or the doing of any act which is about to be done or is being done by or on behalf of the Authority is in contravention of or in excess of the powers conferred by this Act or any other law for the time being in force or is likely to lead to a breach of peace or to cause injury or annoyance to the public or to any class or body of persons or is prejudicial to the interests of the authority, it may, by order in writing, suspend the execution of such resolution or order or prohibit the doing of any such act after issuing a notice to the Authority to show cause, within the specified period which shall not be less than fifteen days, why,:
(a) the resolution or order may not be cancelled in whole or in part; or
(b) any Regulation or bye-law concerned may not be repealed in whole or in part.
(3) Upon consideration of the reply, if any, received from the authority and after such inquiry as it thinks fit, Government may pass orders cancelling the resolution or order or repealing the Regulation or byelaw and communicate the same to the authority.
(4) Government may at any time, on further representation by the authority or otherwise, revise, modify or revoke an order passed under Sub-section (3).
67. Amendment of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961.- (1) In the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1963),:
(a) in Section 2, for item (i) of Sub-clause (a) of clause (7), the following item shall be substituted namely,
(i) the local planning area comprising the City of Bangalore, the Bangalore Development Authority, and;
(b) after Section 81-A, the following section shall be inserted, namely,-
81-B. Consequences to ensue upon the constitution of the Bangalore Development Authority.- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, with effect from the date on which the Bangalore Development Authority is constituted under the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 the following consequences shall ensue,-
(i) the Bangalore Development Authority shall be the local Planning Authority for the local planning area comprising the City of Bangalore with jurisdiction over the area which the City Planning Authority for the City of Bangalore had jurisdiction immediately before the date on which the Bangalore Development Authority is constituted;
(ii) the Bangalore Development Authority shall exercise the powers, perform the functions and discharge the duties under this Act as if it were a Local Planning Authority constituted for the Bangalore City;
(iii) the City Planning Authority shall stand dissolved and upon such dissolution,-'
7. In exercise of the power vested in it under Section 4-A(1) of the Town Planning Act, the State Government issued Notifications dated 1.11.1965 and 13.3.1984 declaring the areas specified therein to be the 'Local Planning Areas'. By the first notification, the State Government declared the area comprising the city of Bangalore and 218 villages enumerated in Schedule I thereto to be the 'Local Planning Area' for the purposes of the Town Planning Act and described it as the Bangalore City Planning Area. The limits of the planning area were described in Schedule II appended to the notification. By the second notification, the area comprising 325 villages around Bangalore (as mentioned in Schedule I) was declared to be the Local Planning Area for the environs of Bangalore. The limits of the city planning area were indicated in Schedule II. At the end of Schedule II of the second notification, the following note was added:
This excludes the Bangalore City Local Planning Area declared (by) Government Notification No. PLN/42/MNP/65/SO/3446 dated 1-11-1965.
8. A third notification was issued on 6.4.1984 under Section 4- A(3) of the Town Planning Act amalgamating the Local Planning Areas of Bangalore declared under the earlier two notifications as 'Bangalore City Planning Area' w.e.f. 1.4.1984.
9. On 1.3.1988, the State Government issued notification under Section 2(c) of the 1976 Act specifying the villages indicated in the first Schedule and within the boundaries indicated in the second Schedule to Notification dated 13.3.1984 to be the areas for the purposes of that clause. We shall refer to this notification a little later in the context of the High Court's negation of the Respondents' challenge to that notification on the ground that the names of the villages or specified areas had not been published in the Official Gazette and, as such, the layout plans of the area comprised in those villages are not governed by the 1976 Act.
10. As a result of unprecedented increase in the population of the city of Bangalore between 1970 and 1980, the available civic amenities like roads, water supply system and supply of electricity were stretched to their limit. To meet the additional requirement of water and electricity and to tackle the problems of traffic, new schemes were prepared in the development plan of Bangalore city, which was approved in 1984. These included augmentation of water supply, formation of Ring Road etc. Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) submitted a proposal to the State Government for taking up of Cauvery Water Supply Scheme, Stage III (for short, 'the Cauvery Scheme') for supply of an additional 270 MLD water to Bangalore at a cost of Rs. 240 crores. The proposed financing pattern of the project was as follows:
(i)
State Government
- Rs.80/- crores,
(ii)
Life Insurance Corporation of India
- Rs. 50/- crores,
(iii)
Bangalore City Corporation
- Rs. 30/- crores, and
(iv)
World Bank
- Rs. 30/- crores, and
11. By an order dated 28.06.1984, the State Government, after taking cognizance of the difficulties being experienced by BWSSB in supplying water to the Bangalore Metropolitan Area and the possibility of acute shortage of water in next 10 years if the supply was not augmented, granted approval to the Cauvery Scheme.
12. Since the World Bank assistance was expected only in the year 1988 and the Cauvery Scheme was to be implemented by 1990 to meet the drinking water needs of the residents of Bangalore, the issue was discussed in the meeting held on 01.01.1987 under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary of the State and it was decided that with a view to avoid escalation in the cost, the funds may be collected from other sources including the BDA because substantial quantity of water was required for the layouts which were being developed by it or likely to be developed in future. In furtherance of that decision, the State Government issued order dated 25.03.1987 and directed the BDA to make a grant of Rs. 30 crores to BWSSB to be paid in installments from 1987-88 to 1989-90 by loading an extra amount as water supply component at the rate of Rs. 10,000/- on an average per site for all the layouts to be formed thereafter.
13. In compliance of the directions given by the State Government, the BDA started collecting Rs. 10,000/- per site. Later on, the levy under the Cauvery Scheme was increased to Rs. 1 lac per acre. By 1992, it was realised that the BDA had not been able to develop and distribute sites as expected. Therefore, a proposal was submitted by the Commissioner, BDA to the State Government that contribution towards the Cauvery Scheme may be distributed among those applying for change of land use and the private layouts to be developed by the house building societies and on major housing projects. The State Government accepted the suggestion of the BDA and passed order dated 12.1.1993 for the levy of charges under the Cauvery Scheme at the rate of Rs. 2 lacs per acre.
14. In 1992, the BDA also decided to take up the construction of 63.30 kilometers long Outer Ring Road and 3.5 kilometers long Intermediate Ring Road at an estimated cost of Rs. 115 crores with a possible escalation up to Rs. 130 crores. 36.24 kilometers of the Outer Ring Road was to pass through the BDA layouts and the balance was to pass through the land outside the BDA layouts. The cost of construction of Outer Ring Road passing through the BDA layout was to be met by charging the allottees of sites in the BDA layouts. For the balance 27.06 kilometers of Outer Ring Road and 3.5 kilometers of Intermediate Ring Road a proposal was prepared to obtain financial assistance from the World Bank. In the meeting held on 5.6.1992 under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary of the State, the possibility of taking loan from HUDCO was explored. Simultaneously, it was considered whether partial burden of the cost could be passed on to the beneficiaries of the private layouts and it was agreed that like the Cauvery Scheme, Ring Road surcharge should be levied on the sites to be formed by the BDA and the private housing societies at the rate of Rs. 1 lac per acre. Thereafter, the BDA passed Resolution dated 19.10.1992 for levy of charges at different rates on change of land use in different areas and Rs. 1 lac per acre on the layouts of housing societies and private lands as also the sites formed by itself.
15. The Air Craft Employees Cooperative Society Ltd. (Respondent in C.A. No. 7503/2002) submitted an application for approval of layout in respect of 324 acres 30 guntas land situated in Singasandra and Kudlu villages, Surjapur Hobli and Begur Hobli respectively. The application of the Respondent was considered in the BDA's meeting held on 31.10.1991 and was approved subject to various conditions including payment of Rs. 2 lacs per acre towards the Cauvery Scheme and Rs. 1 lac as Ring Road surcharge. Another condition incorporated in the Resolution of the BDA was that the civil portion of work shall be carried out by the Respondent under its supervision. The decision of the BDA was communicated to the Respondent vide letter dated 12.11.1992.
16. The Respondent challenged the conditional sanction of its layout in Writ Petition No. 11144/1993 and prayed for quashing the demand of Rs. 2 lacs per acre towards the Cauvery Scheme and Rs. 1 lac as Ring Road surcharge by making the following assertions:
(i) The order passed by the State Government was applicable only to the sites to be formed by the BDA and not the layout of private House Building Societies because as per the Chairman of BWSSB, it will not be possible to take up the responsibility of providing water supply and underground drainage to such layouts and the societies had to make their own arrangements.
(ii) The Cauvery Scheme will be able to meet the requirements of only the citizens residing within the municipal area and some newly formed layouts adjacent to the city.
(iii) There is no provision in the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1964 (for short, 'the 1964 Act') under which the burden of capital required for the execution of schemes could be passed on to the private House Building Societies and, in any case, the BWSSB can recover the cost by resorting to Section 16 of the 1964 Act.
(iv) Under the 1976 Act, the Government is not empowered to authorise the BDA to transfer the cost of the Cauvery Scheme to the private layouts.
(v) 20,000 acres of land has been acquired by the BDA for forming layouts in the vicinity of Bangalore and 10,000 acres had been acquired by the Government for House Building Cooperative Societies and if Rs. 1 or 2 lacs per acre are charged, the Government will collect about Rs. 600 crores from the BDA itself, though the latter's contribution was initially fixed at Rs. 30 crores only.
(vi) The demand of Rs. 1 or 2 lacs per acre towards the Cauvery Scheme is ultra vires the provisions of Article 265 of the Constitution.
(vii) The levy of Rs. 1 lac per acre as Ring Road surcharge is not sanctioned by law and the State and the BDA cannot burden the private layouts without determining whether the Ring Road would be of any use to the members of the House Building Societies.
17. During the pendency of Writ Petition No. 11144/1993, the State legislature amended the 1976 Act by Act. No. 17/1994 and inserted Sub-section (5A) in Section 32 w.e.f. 20.6.1987 authorising the BDA to demand sums in addition to those referred in Sub-section (5) to meet the expenditure towards the execution of any scheme or work for augmenting water supply, electricity, roads, transportation and other amenities within the Bangalore Metropolitan area.
18. The Respondent promptly amended the writ petition and challenged the constitutional validity of the newly inserted Sub-section by asserting that the provision is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution because it gives unbridled and uncanalized power to the BDA to demand additional sums for different schemes. It was also pleaded that Sub-section (5A) has been inserted in Section 32 to legitimize the conditions incorporated in letter dated 12.11.1992 for payment of charges for the Cauvery Scheme and the Ring Road.
19. While the parties were litigating on the constitutionality of the amended provision and legality of the conditional sanction of the layout, the Respondent applied for approval of the BDA for starting civil work. The same was sanctioned subject to payment of the following charges:
(i)
Supervision Charges (at the rate of 9% on Civil Work)
Rs. 92,26,687.00
(ii)
Improvement charges (at the rate of Rs. 20 per sq. mtrs.)
Rs. 1,65,95,008.00
(iii)
Examination charges (0-50 per sq. mtrs.)
Rs. 4,14,876.00
(iv)
Slum Clearance Development Charges (Rs. 25,000 per hectare)
Rs. 20,74, 365.00
(v)
M.R.T.S. Tax (Rs. 50,000 per acre)
Rs. 20,74, 365.00
(vi)
Miscellaneous
Rs. 7,189.00
20. The Respondent challenged the conditional approval of civil work in Writ Petition No. 25833/1998 on the ground that the 1976 Act does not authorize such levies and that the legislature has not laid down any guideline for creating such demand from the private House Building Societies. An additional plea taken by the Respondent was that the BDA has applied the provisions of Section 32 of the 1976 Act under a mistaken impression that the layout was within its jurisdiction. According to the Respondent, no notification had been issued by the State Government for including the villages of North and South Talukas within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. Another plea taken by the Respondent was that the State Government has already collected conversion fine and, as such, the BDA does not have the jurisdiction to levy betterment fee. Similar plea was raised in respect of Mass Rapid Transport System Cess and the Slum Clearance charges.
21. The other House Building Cooperative Societies also filed writ petitions between 1994 and 1998 for striking down Section 32 (5A) and the conditional sanction of their layouts in terms of which they were required to pay for the Cauvery Scheme and the Ring Road apart from other charges mentioned in the sanction of civil work as was done in the case of Air Craft Employees Cooperative Society Limited. They generally pleaded that:
i. the BDA has no jurisdiction to make demands requiring payment of sums under various heads in the matter of sanction of the residential layout plan as areas of their layouts do not form part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area;
ii. the notification issued under Section 2(c) of the 1976 Act is not valid as there is no specification of the adjacent areas;
iii. Notification dated 1.3.1988 is not in consonance with the requirements of law as it does not specify the villages and the areas which were sought to be declared and specified as part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area and the specifications and schedules referred to in the notification have not been published;
iv. the villages which include the lands that form a part of the residential layouts also do not figure in the schedule to Notification dt. 13.3.1984.
22. The writ petitions were contested by the Appellant by making the following assertions:
i. the lands of the Respondents' residential layout fall within the local planning area of the authority and, therefore, they are liable to pay layout charges in respect of the Cauvery Scheme, Ring Road surcharge, slum clearance charge, betterment levy, scrutiny fee, supervision charges, etc.
ii. the charges have been levied in terms of the directions given by the State Government and the decision taken by the BDA.
iii. the societies are required to carry out civil work under the supervision of the BDA and, therefore, they are liable to pay supervision charges.
iv. Section 32(5A) of the 1976 Act does not suffer from any constitutional infirmity and guidance for levy of such charges can be traced in the scheme of the Act.
23. The Division Bench of the High Court first considered the question whether Notification dated 1.3.1988 issued under Section 2(c) of the 1976 Act was invalid because the names of the villages or the specified area had not been notified or published in the Official Gazette and whether in the absence of such notification, the villages in which the societies had formed layouts cannot be treated as part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. The Division Bench referred to the definition of the expression 'Bangalore Metropolitan Area' contained in Section 2 (c) of the 1976 Act, the contents of Notification dated 1.3.1988 and held that the description of the area given in the notification was in consonance with the definition of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area because reference had been made to the villages in Schedule I to Notification dated 13.3.1984 and the boundaries of the planning environs area as per Schedule II of the said notification. The Division Bench opined that if Notifications dated 13.3.1984 and 1.3.1988 are read together, it cannot be said that the particular villages do not form part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area.
24. The Division Bench did not decide the plea of the Respondents that some of the villages were not included in the Schedules by observing that determination of this question involves investigation into a question of fact and this can be considered at the time of approval of the layout plan of the particular society.
25. The argument that while dealing with the issue raised in Writ Petition No. 13907/1995, the BDA had lost the territorial jurisdiction because the areas in question had become part of City Municipal Council, Byatarayanapura and City Municipal Council, Krishnaraja Puram respectively vide Notification dated 22.1.1996 was left to be decided by the BDA with liberty to the concerned Respondent to raise the same at an appropriate stage.
26. The Division Bench then adverted to Articles 265 and 300A of the Constitution and held that the BDA cannot levy or recover the sums specified in the demand notice on the basis of the government order or circular. The Division Bench further held that the approval of layout plan or work order cannot be made subject to the condition of deposit of the sum demanded by it. The Division Bench then analysed the provisions of Section 32 of the 1976 Act and observed:
No principle appears to have been laid down or indicated for the authority to be kept in view and followed when determining in such portion of the expenditure, which expenditure have to relate to be made or to be incurred in the execution of any schemes or works as referred. No doubt, the schemes or works for augmenting the water supply, electricity and other amenities only provide that it should be worked within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area or work is to be for the benefit of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area to provide amenities within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. But, the question is that out of that expenditure which the Bangalore Metropolitan Area has to bear or incur what portion thereof the applicant seeking approval of layout plan etc., will be required to deposit and know the proportion or a portion of that is to be determined by the authority. There is nothing in this section to indicate or to provide any guideline. There are no rules framed under the Act with reference to Sub-section (5-A) of Section 32 of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 to provide guidelines or to indicate as to how that is to be determined. The section does not by itself provide any procedure of either hearing or of giving the notice to the persons affected, or there being opportunity of being heard being given to the concerned persons or person before determination of the portion of the expenditure which the Bangalore Development Authority has to incur with reference to those schemes or works to be levied thereunder.
27. The Division Bench relied upon the ratio in Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar and Ors. MANU/SC/0024/1958 : AIR 1958 SC 538, Jyoti Pershad v. The Administrator for The Union Territory of Delhi MANU/SC/0079/1961 : AIR 1961 SC 1602; Devi Das Gopal Krishnan v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0305/1967 : AIR 1967 SC 1895, State of Kerala v. Travancore Chemicals and Manufacturing Company MANU/SC/0704/1998 : (1998) 8 SCC 188 and observed:
In the present case, Sub-section (5-A) of Section 32 of the Act, does not appear to provide any guidelines so as to determine as to what exact portion of the expenditure should the applicant be required to deposit. No doubt, the entire expenditure cannot be fastened on the applicant. It does not provide any guidelines in this regard. It does not provide the portion of the amount the applicant maybe required to deposit shall bear any percentage on the basis of enjoyment of the benefit by the applicant or the applicant likely to enjoy the benefit qua enjoyment by total area or its population. It also does not provide that the applicant before being required to pay will have opportunity of disputing that claim and challenging the correctness of the portion proposed by the authority to be fastened on him. Really the section appears to confer unbridle powers without providing any guide lines or guidance in that regard. The section also does not provide any remedy against the order of authority under Section 32(5) of the Act.
The Learned Counsel for the Respondents contended that there is remedy against the order of the authority under Section 63 of the Act by way of revision to the Government which may consider the legality or propriety of the order or proceedings. In our opinion, this contention of the Learned Counsel is without substance. In view of the Non obstante clause contained in Sub-section (5-A) of Section 32 of the Act which provides that exercise of that power and it may result in or it may cause irrational discrimination between the same set of persons and the persons maybe deprived of their properties in the form of money by the exercise of sweet will and the unbridled discretion of the authority concerned. In our view this provision as it confers unbridle and uncontrolled power on the authority as such it may enable unequal and discriminatory treatment to be accorded to the persons and it may enable the authority to discriminate among the persons similarly situated. Tested by the yardstick of the principle laid down in Sri Rama Krishna Dalmia's case reported in MANU/SC/0024/1958 : A.I.R. 1958 SC 538 and Shri Jyothi Pershad's case reported in MANU/SC/0079/1961 : A.I.R. 1961 SC 1602. We find that the provision of Sub-section (5-A) of Section 32 of the Bangalore Development Act, 1976 suffers from vice of discrimination and has tendency to enable the authority to discriminate and as such hit by Article 14 of the Constitution.
28. The Division Bench finally concluded that the demand made by the BDA with the support of Section 32(5A) is illegal and without jurisdiction and accordingly allowed the writ petitions.
29. At this stage, it will be appropriate to mention that during the course of hearing on 2.9.2009, Shri Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel appearing for one of the Respondents stated that a sum of Rs. 300 crores (approximately) has been collected by the BDA from the House Building Societies in lieu of sanction of their layouts and substantial amount from the allottees of the sites of the layouts developed by it between 1984-1992 and this, by itself, was sufficient to prove that the exercise of power by the BDA under Section 32(5A) of the 1976 Act is arbitrary. After considering the statement made by Shri Dave, the Court directed the Commissioner and/or Secretary of the BDA to file a detailed and specific affidavit giving the particulars of contribution made by the BDA towards the Cauvery Scheme and the amount demanded and/or collected from those who applied for sanction of the private layouts as also the allottees of the sites in the BDA layouts. In compliance of the Court's direction, Shri Siddaiah, the then Commissioner, BDA, filed affidavit dated 11.11.2009, paragraphs 2 to 5 of which are extracted below:
2. The Government of Karnataka formed the Cauvery Water IIIrd Stage Scheme in 1984. However, the Government directed the Bangalore Development Authority to contribute Rs. Thirty crores towards the Cauvery Water IIIrd Stage Scheme by its order No. HUD 97 MNI 81, Bangalore dated 25th March, 1987. The Bangalore Development Authority started collecting Cauvery Water Cess from 1988. However, the Government by its order No. UDD 151 Bem.Aa.Se 2005, dated 03.05.2005 directed the Bangalore Development Authority to stop collection of the Cauvery Water Cess and Ring RoadCess and MRTS Cess. A copy of the order of the Government Order dated 03.05.2005 directing not collect any cess referred above is produced herewith as Annexure-'A'. The BDA has charged and collected the Cauvery water cess between 1988 and 2005. The Cauvery Water cess collected by the BDA is periodically transferred to the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB). The chart showing year wise payments made to BWSSB towards the Cauvery Water Cess from 1988 till 2005 is produced herewith as Annexure-'B'. The payment chart shows the amount collected towards the Cauvery Water Cess and paid to BWSSB. The chart shows that a total sum of Rs. 34.55 crores are collected from 1988 to April 2005. The sum of Rs. 34.55 crores collected is in respect of both private layouts as well as Bangalore Development Authority sites. The entire money collected towards the Cauvery Water Cess has been paid to the Bangalore Water Supply Sewerage Board, Bangalore as stated above.
3. Similarly, the collection towards the Ring Road Cess from the year 1992-93 and the collections were made up to 2005-06. The total sum collected is Rs. 15.15 crores. The year-wise chart showing the collection of Ring Road Cess is produced herewith as Annexure-'C'. The Ring Road Cess is collected only from the private layouts.
4. With regard to certain averments made in W.P. No. 11144/1993 with regard to estimated collection of Cauvery Water Cess, it is submitted that the estimates are far from accurate. It is just a guess work. The averments made therein that the Government has acquired around 10,000 acres towards the private societies will not be within the knowledge of the Bangalore Development Authority, because the Government does not seek the opinion or consent of BDA before acquiring land for a private layout. The private layouts within the limits of BDA have to apply to BDA for approval of a private under Section 32 of BDA Act. From 1984 till 2005, 194 applications for approval of private layouts were received and were approved by the Bangalore Development Authority involving about an extent of 5668 acres and 15 3/4th gunthas (five thousand six hundred and sixty-eight acres and fifteen and three fourth gunthas). However, Cauvery Water Cess and Ring Road Cess are levied and collected as stated above from 1988 and 2005 respectively. The submissions made in the Writ Petition to the contrary are speculative.
5. Similarly, the averments in the W.P. that the Bangalore Development Authority would collect about 300 crores are speculative. It is submitted with respect after the directions of the Government in 2005, all the above collections have been stopped. Hence, this affidavit.
BANGALORE DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BANGALORE
THE COLLECTION OF CAUVERY WATER CESS & PAID TO BWSSB AS MENTIONED BELOW
(INR in Lakh)
SL NO
CHEQUE NO.
DATE
AMOUNT
1.
FROM FEB 1988 TO APRIL 1992
2,130.00
2.
705908
02.11.1996
150.00
3.
718093
21.01.1997
100.00
4.
737303
15.03.1997
100.00
5.
753086
06.07.1997
100.00
6.
753086
30.12.1997
150.00
7.
753086
18.03.1998
50.00
8.
759664
20.07.1998
50.00
9.
502441
22.01.1999
50.00
10.
769862
15.09.1999
75.00
11.
653066
04.06.2005
500.00
TOTAL
3,455.00
(Rupees Thirty Four Crores and Fifty Five Lakh)
Sd/-
Accounts Officer BDA,
Bangalore
ANNEXURE-II
YEAR WISE RING ROAD CESS
(INR in Lakh)
YEAR
COLLECTIONS
CHARGED TO RING ROAD EXPEND.
BALANCE
1992-93 (Feb 93 on wards)
63.39
63.39
-
1993 -94
183.89
183.89
-
1994-95
217.87
217.87
-
1995-96
331.14
331.14
-
1996-97
162.08
162.08
-
1997-98
180.79
180.79
-
1998-99
84.23
84.23
-
1999-00
50.49
50.49
-
2000-01
19.48
19.48
-
2001-02
0.30
0.30
-
2002-03
7.34
7.34
-
2003-04
-
-
-
2004-05
-
-
-
2005-06
214.27
214.27
-
TOTAL
1,515.27
1,515.27
-
Letter dated 03.05.2005 of the State Government, which is enclosed with the affidavit of Shri Siddaiah, is also reproduced below:
GOVERNMENT of KARNATAKA
UDD.151. BAN.2005: Karnataka Secretariat Multistoried Building Bangalore
Dated: 03.05.2005
Sub: Ring Road Cess, Augmentation Cess (Cauvery Water Cess) & MRTS Cess.
Ref: Government Circular No. 249 of 2001 dated 20.09.2003.
In the above circular referred above, the Government has withdrawn all earlier orders and decided that henceforth Ring Road Cess, Augmentation Cess (Cauvery Water Cess) & MRTS Cess should not be levied. Even so some Corporations, Municipalities and Authorities are charging the above cess.
Therefore, until a decision is taken at the level of the Government about the above stated subject and until further directions, Ring Road Cess, Augmentation Cess (Cauvery Water Cess) & MRTS Cess should not be charged. Hence this order.
Sd/- 03.05.2005
(V.R. Ilakal)
Addl. Secretary, Govt. of Karnataka
Urban Development
30. Thereafter, Shri Anand R.H., President of the Bank Officers and Officials House Building Cooperative Society Limited filed detailed affidavit dated 08.03.2010, paragraphs 2 to 7 whereof are reproduced below:
2. I submit that this Hon'ble Court by order dated 02.09.2009 had directed the Commissioner and/or Secretary of Appellant Bangalore Development Authority (BDA for short) to file a detailed and specific affidavit stating therein the total contribution made by the BDA towards Cauvery Water Supply Scheme Stage III and the amount demanded and/or collected from those who applied for sanction of private layouts as also the allottees of the sites in the layouts prepared by the BDA itself.
3. I say that the BDA has deliberately not at all disclosed the material facts:
i) the total number of the Housing Societies and Ors. who applied for sanction of layouts including private layouts;
ii) the amount BDA has demanded from the Housing Societies and Ors. who have applied for sanction of layouts and private layouts;
iii) the total number of sites formed in the layouts formed by the BDA and allotted to the public;
(iv) the total amount demanded and collected from the allottees of the sites in the layouts formed by BDA itself;
v) as per Government order dated 25.03.1987 the BDA was empowered to levy and collect amount towards the Cauvery Water Supply Scheme also from the Applicants who apply for change in land use and for formation of Group Housing/other major developments and for formation of Private Layouts. The BDA has not disclosed the details of such Applicants or the amount recovered from them in terms of the Government order dated 25.03.1987.
4. I say that in the affidavit under reply the BDA has stated that it has approved layouts involving about an extent of 5668 acres and 15 ' guntas from 1984 till 2005. The extent of area involved in respect of each of the Societies is more than 10 acres in each layout. In terms of the Government Order the BDA has demanded towards the Cauvery Water Supply Scheme at the rate of Rs. 3,00,000/- (Rupees Three Lakhs Only) per acre. Therefore, at a conservative estimate the BDA has raised demand of more than Rs. 170/- crores (5668 x Rs. 3 lakhs). This amount pertains to only Housing Societies. As stated above the BDA has not disclosed the total number of layouts formed by it and the total number of site allotted in the said layouts to its allottees. I say that the BDA has in its officials site http://www.bdabangalore.org/layout.htm has furnished the layout information till 2007 which information has been downloaded from the internet by the deponent. As per the information published by the BDA itself it has formed 62 layouts and has made allotments of about 2 lakh sites to general public. It is also stated therein that in the last one decade more than 10 new layouts have been added to the growing city of Bangalore by BDA as under:
A. BANASHANKARI 6TH STAGE
 743 acres land acquired for phase-3 Banashankari 6th Stage and Anjanapura Further Extension in Uttarahalli Hobli, Bangalore South Taluk, 5000 sites allotted in September 2002.
B. BANASHANKARI 6TH STAGE FURTHER EXTENSION
 '750 acres land acquired in Uttarahalli Hobli, Bangalore South Taluk, 5800 allotted during January 2004.
C. SIR.M. VISWESHWARAYA LAYOUT
 1337 acres and 22 guntas of land acquired for SMV Layout allotted 10,000 sites during March 2003.
D. SIR.M. VISWESHWARAYA LAYOUT FURTHER EXTENSION
 '510 acres land acquired, 4200 allotted during January, 2004. It is near Kengeri Hobli.
E. HSR Layout is on the South-Eastern part of the city closer to Electronic City and Outer Ring Road. It is one among the prestigious layouts of BDA.
A total of 9900 sites have been allotted in HSR Layout during 1986 to 88, 92, 95 and 99.
F. Sir. M. Visweswaraya Nagar Layout is in the Western part of the city. In SMV Layout we have allotted 17, 624 sites
6 x 9 - 4445
9 x 12 - 7368
12 x 18 - 4167
15 x 24 - 1644
G. In SMV Further Extension we have allotted 3615 sites.
In Anjanpura Further Extension we have allotted 7340 sites
6 x 9 ' 1835
9 x 12 ' 3305
12 x 18 ' 1335
15 x 24 - 365
H. In Arkavathi Layout, in the 1st Phase 1710 sites and in the 2nd phase 8314 sites of different dimensions. A total of 3664 (30x40) dimension sites have been allotted totally at the rate of Rs. 2100 sq. mtrs.
S. No
Name of the layout
Location
No. of sites formed
1.
BSK 6th Stage
South part of the city with approach road from Kengeri Road South part of the city with approach road from Kanakapura Road. Biggest Layout formed in recent years
Intermediate
Corner
Total
Total
2.
  15520
2379
17899
15520
3.
Anjanapura Township 1 to 8th Block
5175
816
5991
5175
4.
  4340
683
5023
4340
5.
SMV Layout
West part of the city with approach road from Nagarabhavi Road
9696
1764
11460
9696
6.
SMV further extension
3615
650
4265
3615
7.
SMV further extension
20000
8600
28600
8813
True copy of the layout information published by BDA in its official website: http://www.bdabangalore.org/layout.htm as at 2007 is filed as ANNEXURE A-1 to this affidavit. The true typed copy of Annexure A-1 is filed as ANNEXURE A- 2.
5. I say that if the total number of sites allotted by the BDA in the layout formed by it if taken as 2 lakhs sites as stated in the BDA publication the amount levied and collected by BDA from such allottees will come to Rs. 200 crores (2,00,00,000 x Rs. 10,000/- ).
As stated in the BDA publication in the last decade itself more than 73503 sites have been allotted by the BDA in the layouts formed by itself. The amount levied and collected by the BDA from these allottees in the last one decade at the rate of Rs. 10,000/- per site in terms of the Government Order dated 25.03.1987 towards the Cauvery Water Supply Scheme itself will come to Rs. 73,50,30,000/(Rs. 10,000 per site x 73503 sites).
6. I say that apart from the amount levied and collected by BDA from the above mentioned Applicants, the BDA must have collected the amount towards the Cauvery Water Supply Scheme from the Applicants who applied for change in land use and for formation of Group Housing/other major developments and for formation of Private Layouts at the rate as prescribed in the Government Order dated 25.03.1987.
7. I say that the facts and figures disclosed above is based on the averments made in the affidavit filed by BDA and the information official from the official website of BDA http://www.bdabangalore.org/layout.htm and I believe the same to be correct. Therefore, it is apparent that the BDA has demanded more than Rs. 370 crores from the societies whose layouts have been approved by BDA (Rs. 170 crores) and from its allottees (Rs. 200 crores) excluding the Applicants who applied for change in land use and for formation of Group Housing/other major developments and for formation of Private Layouts.
I say that apart from the fact that the BDA is not empowered to levy and collect the amount towards Cauvery Water Supply Scheme and without prejudice to the submission that the provisions of Section 32(5-A) of the BDA Act is ultra vires the Constitution and without prejudice to rights and contentions raised in the Civil Appeal even assuming that the BDA could levy and collect the amount towards Cauvery Water Supply Scheme, the BDA could collect only Rs. 30 crores. The BDA has however demanded the payment towards Cauvery Water Supply Scheme in excess of over Rs. 370 crores from the Housing Societies and its own allottees apart from the demand made from the Applicants who applied for change in land use and for formation of Group Housing/other major developments and for formation of Private Layouts which facts have not been disclosed by the BDA. The entire information pertaining to the demand and collection of the funds towards Cauvery Water Supply Scheme is available with BDA but has been deliberately withheld. In any event even according to the affidavit filed by the BDA it has collected Rs. 34.55 crores as against the limit of Rs. 30 crores which it could collect under the Government Order. Therefore, the amount collected is far in excess of its limit. On this ground also the demand raised against the Respondent Societies is illegal and without authority of law.
31. We shall first deal with the question whether the area in which the Respondents have formed layouts fall within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. In the impugned order, the Division Bench has recorded brief reasons for negating the Respondents' challenge to Notification dated 1.3.1988. The conclusion recorded by the Division Bench and similar view expressed by Another Division Bench of the High Court in the Commissioner, Bangalore Development Authority v. State of Karnataka MANU/KA/0502/2005 : ILR 2006 KAR 318 will be deemed to have been approved by the three Judge Bench of this Court in Bondu Ramaswamy v. Bangalore Development Authority MANU/SC/0334/2010 : (2010) 7 SCC 129, which referred to Notifications dated 1.11.1965 and 13.3.1984 issued under Section 4A(1) of the Town Planning Act and Notification dated 1.3.1988 issued under Section 2(c) of the 1976 Act and observed:
A careful reading of the Notification dated 1-3-1988 would show that the clear intention of the State Government was to declare the entire area declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965 and the Notification dated 13-3-1984, together as the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. The Notification dated 1-3-1988 clearly states that the entire area situated within the boundaries indicated in Schedule II to the Notification dated 13-3-1984 was the area for the purpose of Section 2(c) of the BDA Act. There is no dispute that the boundaries indicated in Schedule II to the Notification dated 13-3-1984 would include not only the villages enumerated in First Schedule to the Notification dated 13-3-1984 but also the area that was declared as planning area under the Notification dated 1-11-1965. This is because the areas declared under Notification dated 1-11-1965 are the core area (Bangalore City) and the area surrounding the core area that is 218 villages forming the first concentric circle; and the area declared under the Notification dated 13-3- 1984 (325 villages) surrounding the area declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965 forms the second concentric circle. Therefore, the boundaries of the lands declared under the Notification dated 13-3-1984, would also include the lands which were declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965 and therefore, the 16 villages which are the subject- matter of the impugned acquisition, are part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area.
The Learned Counsel for the Appellants contended that the note at the end of Second Schedule to the Notification dated 13-3-1984 excluded the Bangalore City Planning Area declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965. As the planning area that was being declared under the Notification dated 13-3-1984 was in addition to the area that was declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965, it was made clear in the note at the end of the Notification dated 13-3-1984 that the area declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965 is to be excluded. The purpose of the note was not to exclude the area declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965 from the local planning area. The intention was to specify what was being added to the local planning area declared under the Notification dated 1-11-1965. But in the Notification dated 1-3-1988, what is declared as the Bangalore Metropolitan Area is the area, that is, within the boundaries indicated in Schedule II to the Notification dated 13-3-1984, which as noticed above is the area notified on 1-11-1965 as also the area notified on 13-3-1984. The note in the Notification dated 13-3-1984 was only a note for the purposes of the Notification dated 13-3-1984 and did not form part of the Notification dated 1-3-1988. There is therefore no doubt that the intention of the State Government was to include the entire area within the boundaries described in Schedule II, that is, the area declared under the two Notifications dated 1-11-1965 and 13-3-1984, as the Bangalore Metropolitan Area.
In fact ever since 1988 everyone had proceeded on the basis that the Bangalore Metropolitan Area included the entire area within the boundaries mentioned in Schedule II to the Notification dated 13-3-1984. Between 1988 and 2003, BDA had made several development schemes for the areas in the first concentric circle around Bangalore City (that is, in the 218 villages described in First Schedule to the Notification dated 1-11-1965) and the State Government had sanctioned them. None of those were challenged on the ground that the area was not part of Bangalore Metropolitan Area.