MANU/SC/1197/2006
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 1519 of 2006 [Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 23040 of 2005], 1528 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 24415 of 2005], 1546 of 2006, [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23317 of 2005], 1541 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23500 of 2005], 1532 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 24418 of 2005], 1540 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23607 of 2005] 1550 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23609 of 2005], 1520 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23616 of 2005], 1536 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23632 of 2005], 1521 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23700 of 2005], 1515 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23718 of 2005], 1538 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23765 of 2005], 1518 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 24419 of 2005], 1523 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23794 of 2005], 1543 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23810 of 2005], 1517 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23815 of 2005], 1522 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26193 of 2005], 1530 of 2006, [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26088 of 2005], 1534 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26089 of 2005], 1526 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 25048 of 2005] and 1516 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 26090 of 2005]
Decided On: 07.03.2006
Appellants: Bombay Dyeing and Mfg. Co. Ltd.
Vs.
Respondent: Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and P.P. Naolekar, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Ravi M. Kadam, Adv. Gen., Soli J. Sorabjee, Ram Jethmalani, Arun Jaitley, Fali Sam Nariman, Uday Umesh Lalit, Girish Godbole, Mukul Rohatgi, Rajeev Dhawan, Abhishek Manu Singhvi, T.R. Andhyarujina, R.F. Nariman, K.K. Venugopal, V.V. Tulzapurkar, V.A. Mohta, Gonsalves, Dinesh Dwivedi, Janak Dwarkadas, J.J. Bhat, Sr. Advs., Percy Gandhi, Shahrukh Kathawala, Salesh, R.N. Banerjee, Manik Karanjawala, Ravinder Narain, Pallav Shishodia, Pravin Bahadur, Meghalee Barthakur, Nupur Singh, Rajan Narain, Shivaji M. Jadhav, Himanshu Gupta, Brij Kishor Sah, Parimal K. Shroff, Bina Gupta, Rakhi Ray, Inklee Barooah, C. Rashikant, Shailesh, Gopal Jain, P.H. Parekh, Lalit Chauhan, Suresh Goel, Shyam Mehta, Bhavesh Panjwani, Advs. for P.H. Parekh & Co., Meena Doshi, B. Sunita Rao, Amit Bhandari, Sushil Kumar Pathak, U.A. Rana, Sandeep Kharel, Srabonee Roy, Advs. for Gagrat & Co., Ravi Gandhi, Dhaval Vussonji, Pratap Venugopal, E. Venu Kumar, Harshad V. Hameed, Advs. for K.J. John & Co., Anil Menon, S. Udaya Kumar Sagar, Bina Madhavan, Ambuj Agrawal, Advs. for Lawyer's Knit & Co., Dhaval Mehta, Rekha Palli, Venkatesh Dhond, C. Rashmikant, S.K. Srivastava, Santosh Paul, Shweta Gupta, A.K. Ujjainwala S.H., Rakesh Khatana, D.N. Mishra, Jay Salva, Gautam Patel, Parag Kabadi, Lyna Perira, Sharan Jagiani, Devansh A. Mohta, Reena Bagga, Meenakshi Ogra, Minakshi Satya Mitra, M.N. Shroff, Anuradha Singh, Aparna Bhat, Ravindra Keshavrao Adsure, S.S. Shinde, V.N. Raghupathy, Anirudha P. Moyee, Mukesh Verma, Ashok B. Jain, D.T. Devale, Manish Shanker, Pankaj Kumar Singh, Ashish Mohan, Yash Pal Dhingra, N.M. Ganguli, Vinay Navare, Naresh Kumar, Chander Shekhar Ashri, Prashant Bhushan, Vishal Gupta, Rohit Kumar Singh, Sumeet Sharma, Vikas Mehta, Mahesh Agarwal, Manu Krishnan, E.C. Agrawala, Advs.
Subject: SICA
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
MAHARASHTRA REGIONAL AND TOWN PLANNING ACT, 1966 - Section 37
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 24, Constitution Of India - Article 243W, Constitution Of India - Article 39, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Sick Industrial Companies (special Provisions) Act, 1985 [repealed] - Section 15, Sick Industrial Companies (special Provisions) Act, 1985 [repealed] - Section 17, Sick Industrial Companies (special Provisions) Act, 1985 [repealed] - Section 3(e), Sick Industrial Companies (special Provisions) Act, 1985 [repealed] - Section 3(f), Sick Industrial Companies (special Provisions) Act, 1985 [repealed] - Section 3(o), Sick Industrial Companies (special Provisions) Act, 1985 [repealed] - Section 32, Sick Industrial Companies (special Provisions) Act, 1985 [repealed] - Section 32(1); Sick Textile Undertakings( Nationalisation) Act, 1974 - Section 3
Cases Referred:
Lohia Machines v. Union of India MANU/SC/0153/1985; Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors. MANU/SC/0388/2005; Raunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R. Constructions Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0770/1998; Ashok Lanka v. Rishi Dixit MANU/SC/0389/2005; Guruvayoor Devaswom Managing Committee v. C.K. Rajan MANU/SC/0582/2003; Shivajirao Nilangekar Patil v. Dr. Mahesh Madhav Gosavi MANU/SC/0120/1986; Chairman & MD, BPL Ltd. v. S.P. Gururaja and Ors. MANU/SC/0804/2003; K.K. Bhalla v. State of M.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0234/2006; Dr. B. Singh v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0211/2004; Ashok Kumar Thakur v. State of Bihar and Ors. MANU/SC/0011/1996; T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0596/2005; Compack (P) Ltd. v. CCE MANU/SC/1155/2005; Gurudevdatta VKSSS Maryadit v. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0191/2001; Dayal Singh v. Union of India MANU/SC/0058/2003; Swedish Match AB v. Securities and Exchange Board, India MANU/SC/0693/2004; K.L. Gupta and Ors. v. The Bombay Municipal Corporation and Ors. MANU/SC/0353/1967; Maruti Udyog Ltd. v. Ram Lal and Ors. MANU/SC/0056/2005; Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0073/1987; Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd. v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh MANU/SC/0479/1990; Gujarat v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat MANU/SC/0214/2003; Indian Handicrafts Emporium and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0640/2003; Deepal Girishbhai Soni and Ors. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd., Baroda MANU/SC/0246/2004; Balram Kumawat v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0628/2003; Pratap Singh v. State of Jharkhand and Anr. MANU/SC/0075/2005; P.S. Sathappan (Dead) By LRS. v. Andhra Bank Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0873/2004; Venkata Subamma and Anr. v. Ramayya and Ors. MANU/PR/0003/1932; Commr. of Income-tax/Excess Profits Tax, Bombay City v. Messrs. Bhogilal Laherchand including Batliboi and Co., Bombay MANU/SC/0059/1953; The Mangalore Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. The Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal MANU/SC/0232/1978; His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala and Anr. MANU/SC/0445/1973; Onkarlal Nandlal v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. MANU/SC/0321/1985; Charles Bradlaugh v. Henry Lewis Clarke (1883) 8 AC 354; T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad v. Union of India and Ors. ; N.D. Jayal and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0649/2003; Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0686/1996; P.J. Irani v. The State of Madras MANU/SC/0080/1961; Punjab Tin Supply Co., Chandigarh and Ors. v. Central Government and Ors. MANU/SC/0296/1983; Secretary, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Government of India v. Cipla Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0514/2003; Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education and Anr. v. Paritosh Bhupesh Kuamr Sheth and Ors. MANU/SC/0055/1984; R.K. Garg v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0074/1981; Balco Employees Union v. Union of India MANU/SC/0779/2001; State of Rajasthan and Ors. v. Basant Nahata MANU/SC/0547/2005; Manager, Reserve Bank of India, Bangalore v. S. Mani and Ors. MANU/SC/0204/2005; Sonepat Cooperative Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Ajit Singh MANU/SC/0105/2005; Cholan Roadways Ltd. v. G. Thirugnanasambandam MANU/SC/1080/2004; Anil Kumar Jha v. Union of India (2005) 3 SCC 150 ; Rameswar Prasad and Ors. v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0399/2006; Vineet Narain and Ors. v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0926/1996; Union of India and Anr. v. C. Dinakar, IPS and Ors. MANU/SC/0368/2004; Kapila Hingorani v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0403/2003; Trustees of the Port of Madras v. Aminchand Pyarelal and Ors. MANU/SC/0235/1975; Huang and Ors. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department (2005) 3 All. ER 435 ; R. v. Secretary of State of the Home Department, ex. P Daly (2001) 3 All ER 433; Motor General Traders and Anr. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0293/1983; John Vallamattom v. Union of India MANU/SC/0480/2003; Smt. Nandini Satpathy v. P.L. Dani and Anr. MANU/SC/0139/1978; Lennon v. Gibson, (1919) AC 709 ; State of Rajasthan and Anr. v. Mohammed Ayub Naz MANU/SC/0263/2006; A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras MANU/SC/0012/1950; Sharma Transport v. Government of Andhra Pradesh MANU/SC/0759/2001; Khoday Distillery v. State of Karnataka MANU/SC/0242/1996; Otis Elevator Employees' Union S. Reg. and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0906/2003; Om Prakash and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0202/2004; S.N. Chandrashekar and Anr. v. State of Karnataka and Ors. MANU/SC/8005/2006; Forward Construction Co. and Ors. v. Prabhat Mandal (Regd), Andheri and Ors. MANU/SC/0274/1985; Union of India and Anr. v. Azadi Bachao Andolan and Anr. MANU/SC/1219/2003; Baleshwar Bagarti v. Bhagirathi Dass ILR 1908 Cal. 701; Collector of Central Excise, Vadodara v. Dhiren Chemical Industries MANU/SC/0787/2001; Kalyani Packaging Industry v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0527/2004; Gullick v. West Norfolk Area Health Authority 1986 AC 112; Municipal Corporation for City of Pune v. Bharat Forge Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0736/1996; Ajay Gandhi v. B. Singh MANU/SC/0012/2004; Jamshed N. Guzdar v. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0026/2005; Bangalore Medical Trust v. B.S. Muddappa and Ors. MANU/SC/0426/1991; Legg v. Ilea 1972 3 All ER 177; Puran Lal v. President of India MANU/SC/0217/1961; M.A. Panshikar v. State of Maharashtra through its Urban Development Department and Anr. 2002 5 BCR 318; Pune Municipal Corporation and Anr. v. Promoters and Builders Association and Anr. MANU/SC/0487/2004; Balakrishna H. Sawant and Ors. v. Sangli, Miraj & Kupwad City Municipal Corporation and Ors. MANU/SC/0164/2005; Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action v. Union of IndiaMANU/SC/1112/1996; Intellectual Forum, Tirupathi v. State of A.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/8047/2006; A.P. Pollution Control Board v. Prof. M.V. Nayudu (Retd.) and Ors. MANU/SC/0032/1999; Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0640/2000; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Ors. ; M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath and Ors. MANU/SC/1007/1997; Consumer Education & Research Society v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0101/2000; Sushanta Tagore and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0176/2005; Virender Gaur and Ors. v. State of Haryana and Ors. MANU/SC/0629/1995; Friends Colony Development Committee v. State of Orissa and Ors. MANU/SC/0933/2004; South Bucks District Council v. Porter Chichester District Council v. Searle and Ors. (2003) 3 All ER 1 ; Padma v. Hiralal Motilal Desarda and Ors. MANU/SC/0765/2002; NTC (IDA) Employees Association v. Union of India and Ors. SLP No. 16732 of 1997; Sarat Chandra Mishra and Ors. v. State of Orissa and Ors. MANU/SC/0038/2006; State of Karnataka and Ors. v. C. Lalitha MANU/SC/8084/2006; Zain- ul-Abdin Khan v. Muhammad Asghar Ali Khan 15 IA 12; Gurjoginder Singh v. Jaswant Kaur (Smt.) and Anr. MANU/SC/0634/1994; Janak Raj v. Gurdial Singh and Anr. MANU/SC/0033/1966; Padanathil Ruqmini Amma v. P.K. Abdulla MANU/SC/0321/1996; R. & M. Trust v. Koramangala Residents Vigilance Group MANU/SC/0049/2005; State of Maharashtra v. Digambar MANU/SC/0740/1995; Proprietary Articles Trade Association v. AG of Canada (1931) AC 310; Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Australia v. Queen 95 CLR 529
Cases Overruled / Reversed: 
Bombay Environmental Action Group, a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act and Shyam H.K. Chainani Vs. The State of Maharashtra through the Secretary, Urban Development Department and Ors (MANU/MH/0707/2005)
Authorities Referred:
Craies on Statute Law, Seventh Edition, page 141; Francis Bennion's Statutory Interpretation; G.P. Singh's Principles of Statutory Interpretation, Ninth edition, page 258]; Halsbury's Laws of England (Fourth Edition) Volume 44(1) (Reissue); The Interpretation and Application of Statutes", Reed Dickerson, at p.135
Prior History:
From the Final Judgment and Order dated 17.10.2005 of the Bombay High Court in PIL Writ Petition No. 482/2005 (MANU/MH/0707/2005)
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  64

Mentioned
  36

Case Note:

Constitution - Development Control Regulation - Validity of - Public interest litigation was filed by the defendants questioning the validity of Development Control Regulation No. 58 (DCR 58) framed by the State and sale of surplus land occupied by cotton mills - High Court allowed the petition and held that sale of surplus lands was contrary to the BIFR scheme and previous Apex Court's order - Hence, present appeal - Held, DCR 58 was framed with a view to deal with the situation arising out of closure and unavailability of various cotton textile mills and was valid in law - DCR 58 applied to closed mills but sub-regulation of DCR 58 did not apply to sick industries which had not been referred to BIFR - Proposed development plan was in conformity with BIFR scheme and Apex Court's order - Changes made in DCR for development of mill lands were Constitutionally valid - Sale of National Textile Corporation (NTC) mills was not contrary to the BIFR Scheme as also the orders passed by Apex Court - Purchasers of cotton textile mills could not be made to suffer for no fault on their part and the High court committed manifest error in that behalf

Constitution - Development Plan - Validity of - Section 37 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act 1966 (MRTP Act) - Whether regulations and clarification ultra vires Section 37 of the MRTP Act - Writ petitioners contended that DCR 58 changed the character of development plan which included all regulations framed under MRTP Act - Held, certain plots were reserved and were designated for specified purposes in development plan - Section 37 of the MRTP Act itself suggested that changes would be of such nature that would not change character of such development plan which would be otherwise permissible in terms of Section 37 of the MRTP Act - In present case changes made did not bring about any significant change so as to come to a conclusion that its basic feature was altered - Hence, regulations and clarification issued by the State were not violative of Section 37 of the MRTP Act

Constitution - Legislative Background - DCR 58 - Held, DCR 58 provided for redevelopment of lands of cotton textile mills, in terms whereof modernization of mills and development of surplus lands in the manner specified therein was to be promoted - It, furthermore, provided for development of mill lands as a part of package of BIFR, approved rehabilitation schemes and also for modernization and shifting thereof - Pursuant to the said Regulation, the cotton textile mill owners could give one of the options out of the following - Firstly, mill owners could continue to operate their mills even though it was running into losses - This was the status quo option which entailed no land being surrendered to Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA) as well as for public greens - Second option entailed retaining the outer shell of the mill structures and building commercial structures within the mill structure - Third option entailed two steps - First step was raising of construction within the old structure and the second step was to construct on the part of open spaces - Fourth option ensured demolition of the entire old structures and sharing the entire mill lands in approximately three equal proportions - First part would remain with the mill owner which he would be entitled to redevelop - Second part would go to MHADA and the third part would go to public greens

Constitution - Principles of Interpretation - Held, golden rule of interpretation is that unless literal meaning given to a document leads to anomaly or absurdity, the principles of literal interpretation should be adhered to - For correct interpretation of DCR 58, the principles of purposive interpretation should be applied - Words or expression used in a statute before and after amendment should be given the same meaning - Effect of deletion of words must receive serious consideration while interpreting a statute

Constitution - Scope of Judicial Review - Held, by reason of any legislation whether enacted by legislature or by way of subordinate legislation, State gives effect to its legislative policy - Such legislation, however, must not be ultra vires the Constitution - Subordinate legislation apart from being intra vires the Constitution, should not also be ultra vires the parent Act under which it had been made - Subordinate legislation, must be trite, must be reasonable and in consonance with the legislative policy as also give effect to the purport and object of the Act and in good faith - In cases where Constitutionality or interpretation of any legislation, be it made by the Parliament or an executive authority by way of delegated legislation, is in question, it would be idle to contend that a court of superior jurisdiction cannot exercise the power of judicial review - Distinction must be made between an executive decision laying down a policy and executive decision in exercise of its legislative making power

Public Interest Litigation - Principles of - Held, while entertaining a public interest litigation several aspects of public interest are involved - Therefore, Court should find out as to how greater public interest should be subserved - For the said purpose a balance should be struck and harmony should be maintained between several interests - Firstly, consideration of ecology - Secondly, interest of workers - Thirdly, interest of public sector institution, other financial institutions, priority claimed due to workers - Fourthly, advancement of public interest in general and not only a particular aspect of public interest - Fifthly, interest and rights of owners - Sixthly, the interest of a sick and closed industry - Seventhly, schemes framed by BIFR for revival of the company - In doing so courts would have to take into consideration a large number of factors, some of which may be found to be competing with each other - It may not be proper to give undue importance to one at the cost of the other which may ultimately be found to be vital and give effect to the intent and purport for which the legislation was made
Industry: Textile
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. Leave granted in all SLPs.
INTRODUCTION
2. Whether any synthesis between environmental aspects and building regulation vis-à-vis the scheme floated by the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (for short 'BIFR') in terms of the provisions of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (for short, 'SICA') herein is possible is the core question involved in these appeals.
BACKGROUND FACTS
3. The First Respondent herein is a public charitable trust. Its aims and objects, inter alia, are to look after the environment in all respects. It had allegedly initiated and/or participated in matters of environmental importance as regard preservation and improvement wherefore it had moved the court in public interest on several occasions. The Second Respondent herein is said to be the honorary Secretary of the First Respondent and served in various committees appointed by the Central and State Governments as also by the Bombay High Court.
4. The said respondents filed a writ petition questioning the validity of Development Control Regulation No. 58 (DCR 58) framed by the State of Maharashtra in terms of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 [for short "the MRTP Act"]. The Respondents in the writ application, some of whom are Appellants herein, were/ are owners of various cotton textile mills.
5. DCR 58 admittedly was made by the State of Maharashtra with a view to deal with the situation arising out of closure and/or unavailability of various cotton textile mills occasioned inter alia by reason of a strike resorted to by the workers thereof.
WRIT PROCEEDINGS
6. The writ petition questioning the validity of DCR 58 by the First and Second Respondents was filed allegedly to protect the interests of the residents of Mumbai and to improve the quality of life in the town of Mumbai which is said to have drastically been deteriorated during the last fifteen years as also for preventing further serious damage to the town planning and ecology so as to avoid an irretrievable breakdown of the city. The main thrust of the writ petitioners was to ensure "open spaces" for the city and to provide the crying need of space for public housing.
7. In the said writ petition, apart from the State of Maharashtra, the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM), the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA), the National Textile Corporation (NTC) North Maharashtra and South Maharashtra were impleaded as respondents. Before the High Court, a large number of mill owners and others who allegedly have invested a huge sum on the lands of the mill owners or otherwise interested in implementation of DCR 58 of 2001 filed applications for their impleadment as parties therein which were opposed by the writ petitioner- respondents. The said applicants were, however, allowed to intervene in the matter. It is, however, not in dispute that the purchasers from National Textile Corporation were not impleaded as parties therein who are now before us. On or about 2.6.2005, the writ petitions-Respondents took out a Chamber Summons seeking to amend the writ petition. The proposed amendments inter alia related to:
i) a challenge to the clarification dated 28th March, 2003 issued by Respondent No. 3 on the ground that the same seeks to permit residential user and is therefore an amendment of DCR 58 of 2001; and
ii) the alleged requirement of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) in pursuance of notification dated 27th January, 1994 as amended by notification dated 7th July, 2004 issued under the provisions of the Environment Protection Act.
8. The said Chamber Summons was allowed by an order dated 7.7.2005 directing:
We are fully satisfied that the amendments sought are necessary and essential in the above Petition especially when the above petition is a PIL petition, which is yet to be admitted. The Respondents will have full opportunity to deal with these amendments by filing an additional affidavit in reply. Under these circumstances, Chamber Summons is made absolute in terms of prayer clause (a). Amendment to be carried out on or before 16.7.2005
HIGH COURT JUDGMENT
9. The aforementioned writ petition was allowed by the Bombay High Court on 18.02.2005. By its judgment, the Division Bench of the High Court, inter alia, held:
(i) DCR 58 should be construed having regard to the importance of open space and public space;
(ii) By reason of the 2001 amendment, no substantial change had been made and the amendments carried out therein must be construed having regard to the expression 'development' which included 'demolition of structures'.
(iii) DCR 58 as amended must be harmoniously construed so as to uphold the constitutionality thereof. The expression 'open space' would take within its ambit the same space as was obtaining after demolition.
(iv) DCR 58, if not construed in the manner as contended by the writ petitioners would render it ultra vires Articles 14, 21 and 48A of the Constitution of India.
(v) Sales carried out by the National Textile Corporation were contrary to the scheme framed by BIFR as also the orders of this Court dated 05.05.2005
(vi) NTC as a State should have taken steps to modernize its mills or start other textile mills. It could not act like a private mill owner. Its high profits should not be expended towards anything which would be contrary to the objectives for which the Acts of 1974 and 1994 were enacted, as also the scheme of the BIFR and the orders of this Court.
(vii) Doctrine of prospective overruling has no application in the instant case.
(viii) The High Court refused to dismiss the public interest litigation on the ground of delay in view of the enormity of the issues involved. In support of the said contention, it principally relied on the decision of this Court in Lohia Machines v. Union of India MANU/SC/0153/1985 : [1985]152ITR308(SC) .
(ix) It concluded:
(a) In amended DCR 58(1)(b), "open lands" would include lands after demolition of structures.
(b) Clarification dated 28th March, 2003 is clearly violative of Section 37 of MRTP Act and Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
(c) The issue whether the amended DCR 58 is contrary to Section 37 of MRTP Act or Article 21 of the Constitution of India, is kept open.
(d) All the constructions carried out by various Developers are clearly in violation of EIA Notification as amended on 7th July, 2004, as admittedly none of them have obtained clearance from Ministry of Environment and Forests.
(e) All sales of Mill lands carried out by NTC are clearly contrary to the Supreme Court orders dated 11th May, 2005 and 27th September, 2002 and contrary to the sanctioned BIFR schemes.
10. Upon taking into consideration the provisions of the 1994 Amendment Act and SICA, it was held:
(i) State also has a stake in the mills because they meet the requirements of cheap and quality cloth and furthermore provide work and livelihood to many.
(ii) An ecological imbalance would be created by proliferation of high-rise structures in Girangaon area, which was essentially planned for commercial and industrial activities.
(iii) DCR 58 facilitates the implementation of measures for revival, rehabilitation and modernisation of closed, sick and potentially viable sick mills and must, thus, be construed as such.
(iv) NTC should take all such measures as are necessary to protect and encourage the industry and not contrary thereto or inconsistent therewith.
(v) It was necessary to amend DC Regulations to confer additional rights and incentives to enable NTC and the mill owners revive the mills.
(vi) The Commissioner has discretion to permit utilisation of existing built up area and open lands as well as the balance FSI.
(vii) NTC has a statutory obligation to revive, rehabilitate, or modernise the mills.
(viii) Commissioner has the power to allow re-construction and demolition of existing structures, but re-construction is limited to the extent of built up area of the demolished structures.
(ix) Combination of properties whether under common ownership or otherwise and joint development is permitted provided FSI is in balance.
(x) If the textile mill has shifted or the owner establishes a diversified industry then further obligation is cast to offer on priority in the re- located mill or diversified industry, as the case may be, employment to the workers.
(xi) Fruits and benefits of development and re-development cannot be retained by owners but they have to be passed on to those who are legitimately entitled thereto.
(xii) Monies are required to be put in Escrow Account.
(xiii) It is a complete and comprehensive code so far as development and re-development of lands of cotton textile mills is concerned. Mill owners must not be allowed to trade in the properties owned by it.
(xiv) The scheme is very much workable as the regulation allows enough free play to meet the obligations towards workers and financial institutions.
(xv) The intent is to control the development and re-development by making comprehensive regulatory measures, the portions becoming vacant after demolition of existing built-up areas have to be included in the concept "open lands.
11. As regards, the clarification made by the State dated 28.3.2003, it was opined that the same amounts to amendment of DCR 58 and, thus, not being a clarification simpliciter in terms of DCR 62(3), the same was unsustainable. The said clarification was also ultra vires Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
12. As regards non-compliance of the notification dated 07.07.2004, it was observed that none of the mills obtained clearance as per the EIA Notification in spite of High Court's directions to do so and had been carrying on construction activities. MCGM as also the State of Maharashtra did not take any effective step to ensure compliance of the EIA notification. Even the public hearings conducted by the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board were not done satisfactorily. It directed that the public hearings be conducted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests itself, keeping in view the enormity of ecological imbalance and environmental degradation and also keeping in mind 'Precautionary Principle' and the principle of 'sustainable development.'
13. In its judgment, the High Court furthermore opined:
(i) MCGM has not ensured at all, while sanctioning the building plans, compliance of the provisions relating to public amenities.
(ii) No step for compliance with EIA Notification had been taken ever by MCGM..
(iii) MCGM did not ensure furthermore that all the Mill owners provide free housing of 225 Square feet to the occupants. Despite mandatory nature of DCR 58 (7) none of the sanctioned plans provide for any housing for the mill workers/occupants.
(iv) MCGM has not ensured surrendering of lands for "open spaces" and "public housing" as per amended DCR 58, although any construction could commence only after physical surrender of lands as "open spaces" and "public housings."
(v) Since, MCGM had completely abdicated all its basic functions, State of Maharashtra was ordered to take immediate remedial measures.
SUBMISSIONS
14. We have heard a large number of counsel appearing for the parties. Submissions of the learned Counsel appearing for the Appellants and supporting respondents are as under:
Re: DCR 58
(A) DCR 58, as amended in 2001, shall apply not only to a sick mill but also to a closed mill being unviable which had opted for revival/ modernization/shifting. The original DCR 58 being not invalid, the mere grant of additional benefits would not make it ultra vires.
(B) The State cannot be said to have ignored various conflicting objectives while carrying out the amendment in DCR 58.
(C) The High Court, in exercise of its jurisdiction of judicial review, could not have interfered with a policy decision of the State.
(D) The High Court committed a manifest error in holding that the amended version of DCR 58 vis a vis the term 'open space' would have the same meaning as was contemplated under DCR 58 of 1991.
(E) The High Court failed to appreciate that reading down of DCR 58 was impermissible in law.
(F) The High Court ought to have taken into consideration the past experience of the State necessitating amendment of DCR.
(G) The High Court furthermore failed to take note of the fact that the committees appointed by the State also made recommendations that the mill owners would be allowed to develop their lands.
(H) Two different interpretations of DCR 58 having been found by the High Court to be possible, it could not have arrived at a conclusion that clarificatory notification dated 28.03.2003 amounted to an amendment of the Regulation and, thus, void.
(I) The impugned judgment is wholly unsustainable as several irrelevant factors, e.g. deluge in the city of Bombay in 2005, were taken into consideration for the purpose of interpretation of DCR 58.
(J) The findings of the High Court would lead to a radical discrimination between cotton textile mills and other industries which being not based on any rational criteria renders it unconstitutional being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
(K) The High Court failed to take into consideration the fact that the equity was in favour of the appellants herein as they having already demolished the building as having created third party interests, should not have been asked to go back to the same position as was obtaining in the year 1991.
(L) If the impugned judgment is upheld, several provisions of DCR 58, as for example, clause (6) thereof would become otiose and redundant and, thus, interpretation of the High Court in respect of DCR 58 is unsustainable.
(M) No foundational fact having been laid in the writ petition to show as to how the clarification amounts to amendment of DCR 58, the High Court committed a manifest error in arriving at a finding that the said Regulations are ultra vires Section 37 of the Act and/or Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
(N) The Respondent-writ petitioners were guilty of serious delay and laches in filling of the writ petition and thus it was liable to be not dismissed in limine.
Re: Validity of sales of 5 mills by NTC
(a) The High Court in granting relief in favour of the writ petitioners failed to take into consideration relevant factors and based its decision on irrelevant factors and, thus, misdirected itself in law.
(b) The judgment of this Court in Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors. MANU/SC/0388/2005 : (2005)5SCC61 being final and binding on the parties, the High Court committed a serious illegality in interfering therewith.
(c) BIFR scheme had wrongly been taken recourse to for the purpose of construction of the Regulation.
Submissions of Writ Petitioners - Respondents No. 1-2
(1) DCR broadly lays down a scheme of land uses and zoning, Clause 58 thereof as amended in 2001 should be read in conformity with the provisions of the MRTP Act.
(2) The expression 'open land' as contained in DCR 58 must be interpreted in such a manner so as to enable the concerned authorities to sanction a building plan in terms of the extant regulations.
(3) On a plain construction of DCR 58 of 2001, it has rightly been held by the High Court that the intention of the State evidently was to give only double FSI and not to diminish the stake of MCGM and MHADA in the mill land.
(4) Interpretation of DCR 58 by the State has defeated the purport and object of the Act.
(5) For the purpose of upholding the constitutionality of DCR 58, the same was required to be read down, failing which it is rendered unconstitutional.
(6) The effect and purpose of DCR 58 as clarified by the state only having come to the notice of the writ petitioners in 2005 and as the writ petition was filed by them immediately thereafter, the same was not liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches on their part.
(7) In view of the subsequent events, this Court may lay down the principles for the purpose of moulding the reliefs and remit the matter to the High Court for consideration of the matter afresh.
(8) MHADA and the MCGM having taken different stands before the High Court, that they should not be permitted to support the State before this Court.
(9) All applications for grant of permission for development/ redevelopment was required to be considered having regard to the nature of the land as would be existing after demolition of the existing structures.
STATUTORY SCHEME
15. Bombay Town Planning Act, 1954 replaced the Bombay Town Planning Act 1915 which became applicable to the entire State of Maharashtra including the town of Mumbai.
16. In the year, 1966, the legislature of the State of Maharashtra with a view to make provisions for planning and development and use of land in regions established for that purpose and for constitution of Regional Planning Boards therefore and for other purposes mentioned in the preamble thereto enacted the MRTP Act repealing and replacing the Bombay Town Planning Act, 1954. It came into force with effect from 11th January, 1967.
17. MRTP Act provides for formulation of regional plans and development plans. Definitions of some of the expressions which are relevant for our purpose are as under:
2(7) "Development" with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of buildings, engineering, mining or other operations in, or over, or under, land or the making of any material change, in any building or land or in the use of any building or land or any material or structural change in any heritage; building or its precincts and includes demolition of any existing building structure or erection or part of such building, structure of erection; and reclamation, redevelopment and lay-out and sub-division of any land; and "to develop" shall be construed accordingly;
2(9) "Development plan" means a plan for the development or re-development of the area within the jurisdiction of a planning Authority and includes revision of a development plan and proposals of a special planning Authority for development of land within its jurisdiction;
2(9A) "development right" means right to carry out development or to develop the land or building or both and shall include the transferable development right in the form of right to utilise the Floor Space Index of land utilisable either on the remainder of the land or partially reserved for a public purpose or elsewhere, as the final Development Control Regulations in this behalf provide;
2(13A) "Floor Space Index" means the quotient or the ratio of the combined gross floor area to the total area of the plot, viz.: -
18. Section 2(27) defines regulations made under Section 159 of the MRTP Act and includes zoning and other regulations made as part of a regional plan, development plan or town planning scheme. The land-use maps and the development control rules/ regulations together comprise the development plan under Section 22. The land-use map indicates the zone in which a piece of land falls, in regard whereto the permissible uses are specified in the rules/ regulations. In each of such zonal plan, although the industrial areas have been delineated separately but existence of each of the cotton textile mills therein has specifically been shown which evidently shows that cotton textile mills had been given a special status.
19. The regional plan is drawn up by the State Government in terms of Section 14 read with Section 17 of the MRTP Act. Section 14 inter alia mandates specification of land uses, i.e., residential, industrial, agricultural, etc., reservation for open spaces, gardens, etc., reservation and conservation of areas of natural scenery as also infrastructure such as transport, water supply, drainage, sewerage, etc.
20. Section 21 mandates drafting of a Development Plan by every Planning Authority for the area within its jurisdiction.
21. Section 22 lays out the contents of such development plan indicating the manner of use and development of land. As far as possible, the same is to provide for:-
a) Allocation of land for residential, industrial, commercial, agricultural uses, etc;
b) Designation of land for public purposes;
c) Designation of areas for open spaces, playgrounds, stadia, zoological gardens, green belts, nature reserves, sanctuaries and dairies;
d) Transport and communication;
e) Public utilities and amenities;
f) Reservation of land for community facilities and services.
22. Section 37 permits modification of a Development Plan by the Planning Authority or in cases of urgency by the State Government in exercise of its power under Sub-section 1AA of Section 37 which reads as under:
(1AA) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (1), (1A) and (2), where the State Government is satisfied that in the public interest it is necessary to carry out urgently a modification of any part of, or any proposal made in, a final Development Plan of such a nature that it will not change the character of such Development Plan, the State Government may, on its own, publish a notice in the Official Gazette, and in such other manner as may be determined by it, inviting objections and suggestions from any person with respect to the proposed modification not later than one month from the date of such notice, and shall also serve notice on all persons affected by the proposed modifications and the Planning Authority.
[emphasis supplied]
23. Section 38 provides for periodic revisions of the development plan making it mandatory to revise the same at least once in every 20 years.
24. Section 43 restricts change in use or development of land without the written permission of the Planning Authority. Such application is required to be made in terms of Section 44 of the Act.
25. Section 45 confers power to grant such permission whereas Section 46 makes it mandatory for the planning authority to have due regard to the provisions of the draft of final plan or a sanctioned plan.
26. Section 159 of the MRTP Act empowers any Regional Board or Development Authority to make regulations consistent with the provisions thereof or the rules made thereunder inter alia to carry out the purposes thereof. Sub-section (2) of Section 159 empowers the State Government to make special development control regulations consistent therewith and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purpose of executing a Special Township Project and such regulations may be a part of Development Control Regulations or Development Plan or Regional Plan, as the case may be.
27. In terms of the MRTP Act, Development Control Rules (DCR), 1967 were framed. The State Government took a policy decision to frame new DCR in 1990 wherefore suggestions / opinions from the public were invited.
28. The State of Maharashtra in exercise of its power conferred on it under Section 159(2) of the MRTP Act framed the Development Control Regulations, 1991 (for short "the 1991 Regulations"). The Development Plan had been notified in the year 1981 and the Development Control Regulations formed a part thereof. The said regulations, indisputably, were framed upon carrying out the requisite formalities.
29. The expression "existing building" is defined in Regulation 2(28) to mean "a building or structure existing authorizedly before the commencement of these regulations. The expression Floor Space Index (FSI) is defined under Regulation 2(42) to mean "the quotient of the ratio of the combined gross floor area of all floors, excepting areas specifically exempted under these Regulations to the total area of the plot. Regulation 3(1) makes the regulations applicable to "_all development, redevelopment, erection and/ or re-erection of a building, change of user, etc., as well as to the design, construction, reconstruction, and additions and alterations to a building".
30. Regulation 3(2) reads as under:
Part construction where the whole or part of a building is demolished or altered or reconstructed/ removed, except where otherwise specifically stipulated, these regulations apply only to the extent of the work involved.
31. In terms of Regulation 21 whenever more than one building is proposed on any land or where the land development measures more than 1000 sq. m. in a residential, commercial or industrial zone, it is mandatory to prepare a lay-out plan. A lay-out plan would also be necessary where sub-divisions are required to be made. Such plan inter alia has to include "a table indicating the size, area and use of all the plots in the sub-division/ lay- out plan". It should also contain "a statement indicating the total area of the site area utilized under roads, open spaces for parks, playgrounds, recreation spaces and development plan designations, reservations and allocations, schools, shopping and other public places along with their percentage with reference to the total area of the site_"
32. Land uses have been provided for in Regulation 9 stating that uses of all lands should be regulated in regard to type and manner of development/ redevelopment as specified in Table 4. In Table 4 inter alia the following uses have been mentioned:
(a) Residential
(b) Commercial
(c) Industrial
(d) Transportation
(e) Public and semi-public
33. Regulation 32 read with Table -14 prescribes the floor space indices in relation to the town of Bombay stating that for residential zone, it would be 1.33 whereas for the service zone it would be 1.00.
Item 3 of Table 14 specifies different zones stating:
34. Regulation 34 provides for available Transferable Development Rights (TDR) if the development potential of a plot is separated from the land. TDR so granted can be alienated in the manner prescribed by the regulation. Regulation 35, in the matter of calculating the floor space index built up area in respect of a plot, requires exclusion of certain areas for large plots in residential and commercial zones, i.e., plots exceeding 2500 sq. m. approx., i.e., 15% of the area has to be excluded for recreational amenity, open space, etc.
35. Regulation 51(1) speaks of ancillary uses. Regulation 52 provides that what could be done in terms of Regulation 51 can be done also in terms of Regulation 52; whereas Regulation 53 provides that what could be done in terms of Regulations 51 and 52 could be done also in terms of Regulation 53. Regulation 54(1)(i) provides for industries in C-2 zone wherein also commercial uses as specified therein are permissible.
36. Regulations 56 to 58 provide for user of land for industrial zones.
37. Regulation 56 of the 1991 Regulations provides for the General Industries Zone (I-2 Zone) which includes any building or part of a building or structure in which products or materials of all kinds and properties are fabricated, assembled or processed. Sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 56, inter alia, enumerates textile' manufacture except manufacture of rope, bandage, net and embroidery using electric power upto 37.5 KW.
38. It is not disputed that all the mill lands fall in either residential or I-2 Zones. The I-2 zones permits buildings and premises to be used for industrial and accessory uses except one category under Sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 56 new textile mills cannot be constructed in the said areas. Sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 56 contains a non-obstante clause providing that service industries and service industrial estates shall be permitted in the General Industries Zone. Sub-regulations 3(b), 3(c) and 3(d) of Regulation 56 read as under:
(b) With the previous approval of Commissioner and on such conditions as deemed appropriate by him, the existing or newly built-up area of unit, in the General Industrial Zone (Zone I-2), (including industrial estates) excluding that of cotton textile mills, may be permitted to be utilized for an office or commercial purposes as a part of a package of measures recommended by the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR), Financial Institutions and Commissionerate of Industries for the revival/ rehabilitation of potentially viable sick industrial units.
(c) With the previous approval of the Commissioner, any open land or lands or industrial lands, in the General Industrial Zone (I-2 Zone) be permitted to be utilized for any of the permissible users in the Residential Zone (R-1 Zone) or the Residential Zone with shop line (R-2 Zone) or for those in the Local Commercial Zone (C-1 Zone) subject to the following.
(d) With the previous approval of the Commissioner, and subject to such terms as may be stipulated by him, open land in existing industrially zoned land or space, excluding land or space of cotton textile mills, which is unoccupied or is surplus to requirement of the industry's use may be permitted to be utilized for office or commercial purposes but excluding warehousing.
39. Sub-regulation (4) of Regulation 56 deals with other uses in the General Industrial Zone.
40. Regulation 57 of the 1991 Regulations provides for Special Industrial Zone known as I-3 Zone. Manufacture of textile goods do not come within the purview thereof. In terms of the said Regulation, similar restrictions on land user have been provided except service industries and service industrial estates. Change of user is allowed for lands other than lands of cotton textile mills.
41. Regulation 57(4)(c) is in pari materia with Regulation 56(3)(c).
LEGAL HISTORY OF DCR 58
42. DCR 58 of 1991 provided for development or redevelopment of lands of cotton textile mills; in terms whereof, modernization of mills and development of surplus lands in the manner specified therein was to be promoted. It, furthermore, provided for development of mill lands as a part of package of BIFR approved rehabilitation schemes and also for modernization and shifting thereof. Pursuant to the said Regulation, the cotton textile mill owners could give one of the options out of the following:
(i) The mill owners could continue to operate their mills even though it was running into losses. This was the status quo option which entailed no land being surrendered to MHADA as well as for public greens.
(ii) The second option entailed retaining the outer shell of the mill structures and building commercial structures within the mill structure.
(iii) The third option entailed two steps. The first step was raising of construction within the old structure and the second step was to construct on the part of open spaces.
(iv) The fourth option ensured demolition of the entire old structures and sharing the entire mill lands in approximately three equal proportions.
The first part would remain with the mill owner which he would be entitled to redevelop. The second part would go to MHADA and the third part would go to public greens.
43. In terms of the said offer, only two mills exercised the second option and three opted for the third. Nobody had opted for the fourth option presumably because pursuant thereto about 2/3rd of the land possessed by the owner of the mill was required to be surrendered.
44. DCR 58 provides for a complete code. A distinction, therein has been made between cotton textile mills on the one hand and non-cotton textile mills, on the other.
45. In 2001, DCR 58 was amended/ modified. DCR 58 as amended in the year 2001 reads as under:
58. Development or redevelopment of lands of cotton textile mills;
(1) Lands of sick and/or closed cotton textile mills. -- With the previous approval of the Commissioner to a layout prepared for development or redevelopment of the entire open land built-up area of the premises of a sick and/or closed cotton textile mill, and on such conditions deemed appropriate and specified by him, and as a part of a package of measures recommended by the Financial Institutions and Commissionerate of Industries for the revival/rehabilitation of a potentially viable sick and/or closed mill, the Commissioner may allow;
(a) The existing built-up areas to be utilised
(i) for the same cotton textile or related user subject to observance of all other Regulations;
(ii) for diversified industrial users in accordance with the industrial location policy, with office space only ancillary to and required for such users, subject to and observance of all other Regulations;
(iii) for commercial purposes, as permitted under these Regulations;
(b) Open lands and balance FSI shall be used as in the Table below:
Note
(i) In addition to the land to be earmarked for recreation ground/garden/play ground or any other open user as in column (3) of the above Table, open spaces, public amenities and utilities for the lands shown in columns (4) and (5) of the above Table as otherwise required under these Regulations shall also be provided.
(ii) Segregating distance as required under these Regulations shall be provided within the lands intended to be used for residential/commercial users.
(iii) The owner of the land will be entitled to Development Rights in accordance with the Regulations for grant of Transferable Development Rights as in Appendix VII in respect of the lands earmarked and handed over as per column (4) of the above Table. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regulations, Development Rights in respect of the land earmarked and handed over as per column (3) shall be available to the owner of land for utilisation in the land as per column (5) or as Transferable Development Rights as aforesaid.
(iv) Where FSI is in balance but open land is not available, for the purposes of column (3) and (4) of the above Table, land will be made open by demolishing the existing structures to the extent necessary and made available accordingly.
(v) Where the lands accruing as per columns (3) and (4) are, in the opinion of the Commissioner of such small sizes that they do not admit of separate specific uses provided for in the said columns, he may, with the prior approval of Government, earmark the said lands for the use as provided in column (3).
(vi) It shall be permissible for the owners of the land to submit a composite scheme for the development or redevelopment of lands of different cotton textile mills, whether under common ownership or otherwise upon which the lands comprised in the scheme shall be considered by the Commissioner in an integrated manner.
(2) Lands of cotton textile mills for purpose of modernisation:- With the previous approval of the Commissioner to a layout prepared for development or redevelopment of the entire open land and/or built-up area of the premises of a cotton textile mill which is not sick or closed, but requiring modernisation on the same land as approved by the competent authorities, such development or redevelopment shall be permitted by the Commissioner, subject to the condition that it shall also be in accordance with scheme approved by Government provided that with regard to the utilisation of built-up area, the provisions of Clause (a) of Sub-Regulation (1) of this Regulation shall apply and, if the development of open lands and balance FSI exceeds 30 per cent of the open land and balance FSI, the provisions of Clause (b) of Sub-regulation (1) of this Regulation shall apply.
Notes:
(i) The exemption of 30 per cent as specified above may be availed of in phases, provided that, taking into account all phases, it is not exceeded in aggregate.
(ii) In the case of more than one cotton textile mill owned by the same company, the exemption of 30 per cent as specified above may be permitted to be consolidated and implemented on any of the said cotton textile mill lands within Mumbai provided, and to the extent, FSI is in balance in the receiving mill land.
(3) Lands of cotton textile mills after shifting: If a cotton textile mill is to be shifted out side Greater Bombay but within the State, with due permission of the competent authorities, and in accordance with a scheme approved by Government, the provisions of Sub-clauses (a) and (b) of sub- regulation (1) of its Regulation shall also apply in regard to the development or redevelopment of its land after shifting.
(4) The condition of recommendation by the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) shall not be mandatory in the case of the type referred to in Sub-regulations (2) and (3) above.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained above, the Commissioner may allow additional development to the extent of the balance FSI on open lands or otherwise by the cotton textile mill itself for the same cotton textile or related user.
(6) With the previous approval of the Commissioner to a layout prepared for development or redevelopment of the entire open land and/or built up area of the premises of a cotton textile mill which is either sick and/or closed or requiring modernisation on the same land, the Commissioner may allow,:
(a) Reconstruction after demolition of existing structures limited to the extent of the built up area of the demolished structures, including by aggregating in one or more structures the built up areas of the demolished structures;
(b) Multi-mills aggregation of the built up areas of existing structures where an integrated scheme for demolition and reconstruction of the existing structures of more than one mill, whether under common ownership or otherwise, is duly submitted, provided that FSI is in balance in the receiving mill land.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained above-(a) if and when the built up areas of a cotton textile mill occupied for residential purposes as on the 1st of January 2000 developed or Page 359 redeveloped, it shall be obligatory on the part of the land owner to provide to the occupants in lieu of each tenement covered by the development or redevelopment scheme, free of cost, an alternative tenement of the size of 225 sq. ft. carpet area;
(b) if and when a cotton textile mill is shifted or the mill owner establishes a diversified industry, he shall offer on priority in the relocated mill or the diversified industry, as the case may be, employment to the worker or at least one member of the family of the worker in the employ of the mill on the 1st January 2000 who possesses the requisite qualification or skills for the job;
(c) for the purpose of Clause (b) above, the cotton textile mill owner shall undertake and complete training of candidates for employment before the recruitment of personnel and starting of the relocated mill or diversified industry takes place.
8(a) Funds accruing to a sick and/or closed cotton textile mill or a cotton textile mill requiring modernisation or a cotton textile mill to be shifted, from the utilisation of built up areas as per Clause (a) of Sub-regulation (1) and as per Clauses (a) and (b) of Sub-regulation (6) or from the sale of Transferable Development Rights in respect of the land as per columns (3) and (4) of the Table contained in Clause (b) of Sub-regulation (1) or from the development by the owner of the land as per column (5), together with FSI on account of the land as per column (3), shall be credited to an escrow account to be operated as hereinafter provided.
(b) The funds credited to the escrow account shall be utilised only for the revival/rehabilitation or modernisation or shifting of the cotton textile mill, as the case may be, provided that the said funds may also be utilised for payment of worker's dues, payments under Voluntary Retirement Schemes (VRS), repayment of loans of banks and financial institution taken for the revival/rehabilitation or modernisation of the cotton textile mill or for its shifting outside Greater Mumbai but within the State.
9(a) In order to oversee the due implementation of the package of measure recommended by the Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) for the revival/rehabilitation of a potentially sick and/or closed textile mill, or schemes approved by Government for the modernisation or shifting of cotton textile mills, and the permissions for development or redevelopment of lands of cotton textile mills granted by the Commissioner under this Regulation, the Government shall appoint a Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of a retired High Court Judge with one representative each of the cotton textile mill owners, recognised trade union of cotton textile mill workers, the Commissioner and the Government as members.
(b) The Commissioner shall provide to the Monitoring Committee the services of a Secretary and other required staff and also the necessary facilities for its functioning.
(c) Without prejudiced to the generality of the functions provided for in Clause (a) of this sub-regulation, the Monitoring Committee shall, --
(i) lay down guidelines for the transparent disposal by sale otherwise of built up space, open lands and balance FSI by the cotton textile mills;
(ii) lay down guidelines for the opening operation and closure of escrow accounts;
(iii) approve proposals for the withdrawal and application of funds from the escrow accounts;
(iv) monitor the implementation of the provisions of this Regulation as regards housing, alternative employment and related training of cotton textile mill workers.
(d) The Monitoring Committee shall have the powers issuing and enforcing notices and attendance in the manner of a Civil Court.
(e) Every direction or decision of the Monitoring Committee shall be final and conclusive and binding on all concerned.
(f) The Monitoring Committee shall determine for itself the procedures and modalities of its functioning.
REASONS FOR AMENDMENT
46. We may, at this juncture, take notice of the stand taken by the State before the High Court. The State of Maharashtra filed several affidavits before the Bombay High Court stating the backdrop of events leading to amendment in 2001. It is accepted that the State appointed several committees to make an in depth study of the matter. In an affidavit affirmed by one Shri Ramanand Tiwari, Principal Secretary, Urban Development Department, Government of Maharashtra, on 22nd March, 2005, it was stated:
I say that the deteriorating condition of the textile units and need to have sites for public purpose and public housing, prompted Government to have a policy which threw open these lands for development or redevelopment to facilitate revival and modernization of mills. Thus, in the year 1991, when the Revised Development Control Regulations were sanctioned, Regulation 58 for development of mill land and premises for cotton textile mills was introduced for the first time.
47. In the said affidavit, it was categorically stated that a committee under the Chairmanship of the then Minister for Textiles, Shri Ranjit Deshmukh was constituted on or about 27th March, 2000. The report by the said Committee was submitted on 6.7.2000. It was stated that the Government duly considered the report of the said Committee and the Cabinet approved its recommendations on 11.10.2000.
48. DCR 58 was modified upon following the procedure under Section 37(1AA) of the MRTP Act and in terms of the decision of the Cabinet. However, in a second affidavit affirmed by Shri Ramanand Tiwari on 10th August, 2005, some clarification as regard the stand of the State was given. While meeting the contentions raised by the Writ Petitioners, it was stated:
I say that a reference to the Ranjit Deshmukh Committee has been made in my earlier affidavit dated 22nd March, 2005. I say that in the said affidavit, the genesis of the amended Regulation 58 have been elaborately stated. I say that the Petitioner's contention that the said report has not been disclosed by the State, is totally unjustified and unwarranted. I say that when a mention of the said report has been made in my earlier affidavit, the Petitioners could have sought a copy of the said report from the State. Since the Petitioners have never done so as it can be presumed that the Petitioners already have a copy of the said report in their possession but are only putting a pretence that they do not have a copy. It is also unbelievable that the Petitioners who otherwise have all the relevant information including various reports on which they rely in the petition as filed as well as the amended petition do not have a copy of the said Ranjit Deshmukh Committee Report. In any event, the State has no objection to furnishing a copy of the report of the Ranjit Deshmukh Committee if the Petitioners so desire.
49. The deponent of the said affidavit further denied and disputed the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that the Government intended to side with the private developers at the cost of the city as a whole and had not made any amendment in furtherance of the Charles Correa Committee Report. It was stated:
I say that as stated in my earlier affidavit dated 22.3.2005, the State Government has culled out certain recommendations of the Correa Committee as also certain recommendations of the Ranjit Deshmukh Committee whilst coming to a conclusion the need for, and thereafter incorporating suitable amendments to the said DCR 58.
50. The said stand of the State, however, underwent some change when the same deponent in his third affidavit dated 17th August, 2005 in purported clarification of the earlier stand of the State stated:
I am making this further affidavit in order to explain the position with regard to the change made with regard to Regulation 58(1)(b) and the clarification issued on March 28, 2003. The Ranjit Deshmukh Committee gave its report on July 06, 2000. Thereafter, the report was circulated to all the concerned departments, the Urban Development Department, the Labour Department, the Textile Department and the Industries Department. A detailed Cabinet note was prepared for consideration by the Cabinet which not only included the recommendations of the Ranjit Deshmukh Committee report but also specifically the views of the various departments. On this aspect, the views of the Urban Development Department were that in view of the prevailing regulation 58 which required sharing of lands after demolition under Regulation 58(1)(b) the Mill Owners were not willing to come forward with proposals since the same would not be viable for them. It was the view of the Department that in order to make revival feasible and possible the area available after demolition of existing structure should be excluded from computation of the land to be shared. After the Cabinet decision, the then Secretary whilst formulating the amendments and the proposed modification to regulation 58 specifically included the deletion of the words beginning with "lands after demolition" upto "scheme to" and substitution thereof by the words "balance FSI shall". This was the subject matter of Item (A-6) of schedule I to the Public Notice which was issued on November 29, 2000.
51. Evidently, the Charles Correa Committee Report had not been given effect to, but the same as would appear hereinafter `had been taken note of by the Deshmukh Committee.
52. A fourth affidavit again came to be filed by the same deponent on 29th August, 2005.
REPORTS OF THE TWO COMMITTEES RELEVANCE
53. It may also be of some interest to refer to the report of the two Committees.
54. The State of Maharashtra appointed a committee headed by Shri Charles Correa, Architect/ Planner in 1996. The development under 1991 Regulation was put on hold from 1996 to 2001. In Part I of the Report, the Committee lamented that out of the 53 mills, they could gain access only to 26 mills. They advocated for aggregation of mills. They identified those which were viable or considered viable and suggested that the lands of unviable mills should be disposed of. It proposed a holistic development of the mill lands. It also noticed the need for leaving open spaces. It took into consideration other factors, namely, transport, urban form, open spaces and employment generation. As regard open spaces, it stated:
The Public Open Spaces proposed (see fig 23) vary in size from large Maidans to small Neighbourhood Parks, so that a variety of different open-air activities can take place. In front of the Railway Stations, large Pedestrian plazas have been proposed, surrounded by shopping arcades (so that the people can pick up their vegetables and other purchases on their way home a classic pattern found all over Mumbai). Then again, the principal roads can be widened and lined with trees, so that they are converted into leafy boulevards.
55. A second committee was constituted but it did not submit any report.
56. Another Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Ranjit Deshmukh, the then Minister for Textiles and included a representative of all the Ministries and Departments concerned including the Urban Development Department. The Committee appointed a sub- committee. The sub-committee inter alia took into consideration the recommendations of the Charles Correa Study Group, prevailing provisions belonging to textile mills, prevailing state of affairs with respect thereto, demands of the National Textile Industries Board. It also held discussions with various bodies including the mill workers and mill owners as also MPs and MLAs of the town of Mumbai. It, however, carried out actual site inspection of some textile mills only. The Committee recommended:
Since rule 58(1)(a) contains the term "newly built-up", it is presumed that it permits new construction. But, carrying out such new construction means using the balance Floor Space Index and consequently using the adjoining open space. Thus, using open space in this manner under the provisions of rule 58(1)(a) means indirectly to override the provisions of rule 58(1)(b). Hence, in order to more clearly distinguish the boundary line between rule 58(1)(a) and 58(1)(b) following amendments are required to be carried out in this rule under Section 37.
(a) The words "or newly" in rule 58(1)(a) should be excluded.
(b) The words "permissible FSI and" in rule 58(1)(a)(i) should be excluded.
(c) The words "FSC of 1.00 and" in rule 58(1)(a)(ii) should be excluded.
Upon making aforesaid changes the rule 58(1)(a) shall be limited to the extent of new use of the existing buildings of the mills only and exercise of rule 58(1)(b) shall be regarding development of the available open lands and land becoming vacant upon demolition of the existing buildings. However, such development shall be subject to permissible FSI.
57. In Paragraph 19.1, it made some suggestions for giving encouragement to revival of mills stating:
Hence the provisions of rule 58(1)(b) should be made more attractive and in order to promote revival, the mills owners should be permitted to use the development rights of the open lands, to be handed over to municipal corporation, in the lands of their share as per column (5) of the aforesaid Table (even if such lands are situate in Mumbai island) and for this purpose the prevailing provision of rule 58(1)(b) should be amended as per Section 37. Such recommendation is also made by the Korea (sic Correa) Study Group.
58. It furthermore encouraged modernization of mills. It suggested certain incidental amendments also.
59. From what has been noticed hereinbefore, it is evident that as per the suggestion of Ranjit Deshmukh Committee the words "or newly" were omitted as according to it, it may give rise to a lot of confusion. From paragraph 18.8 of the report also, it appears that the said Committee suggested use of different language, namely, "lands after demolition of structure". We find from the said report that the Committee suggested a draft in respect of DCR 58(1)(b) of the Regulations. It is in that context, we may have to consider the second affidavit affirmed by Shri Ramanand Tiwari when he stated that the Cabinet had approved the report albeit not in its entirety.
60. The draft regulations thereafter were notified for considering the objections thereto, if any. Several objections were filed, they were considered by the appropriate authority including the planning authority.
61. Evidently, the said two reports were considered by the Cabinet but it intended to give more to the mill owners than what was recommended inter alia by introducing Sub-regulation (6) of DCR 58. The intent and purport of the State is apparent from DCR 58. It accepted a major part of the recommendations of the Deshmukh Committee but thought that the mill owners should be given something more.
PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION: SCOPE OF
62. While entertaining a public interest litigation of this nature several aspects of public interest being involved, the Court should find out as to how greater public interest should be subserved and for the said purpose a balance should be struck and harmony should be maintained between several interests such as (a) consideration of ecology; (b) interest of workers (c) interest of public sector institution, other financial institutions, priority claimed due to workers; (d) advancement of public interest in general and not only a particular aspect of public interest; (e) interest and rights of owners; (f) the interest of a sick and closed industry; and (g) schemes framed by BIFR for revival of the company.
63. The courts in doing so would have to take into consideration a large number of factors, some of which may be found to be competing with each other. It may not be proper to give undue importance to one at the cost of the other which may ultimately be found to be vital and give effect to the intent and purport for which the legislation was made.
64. Scope of Public Interest Litigations in view of several decisions of this Court has its own limitations. We would hereinafter notice a few of them.
65. In Raunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R. Constructions Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0770/1998 : AIR1999SC393 , this Court highlighted that the public interest litigation should not be a mere cloak. The court must be satisfied that there is some element of public interest involved in entertaining such a petition. The court also cautioned that before entertaining a writ petition and passing an interim order overwhelming public interest should be taken into consideration therefore. It was further observed:
It is important to bear in mind that by court intervention, the proposed project may be considerably delayed thus escalating the cost far more than any saving which the court would ultimately effect in public money by deciding the dispute in favour of one tenderer or the other tenderer. Therefore, unless the court is satisfied that there is a substantial amount of public interest, or the transaction is entered into mala fide, the court should not intervene under Article 226 in disputes between two rival tenderers.
66. In Ashok Lanka v. Rishi Dixit MANU/SC/0389/2005 : AIR2005SC2821 , this Court opined:
it is well settled that even in a case where a petitioner might have moved the Court in his private interest and for redressal of personal grievances, the Court in furtherance of the public interest may treat it necessary to enquire into the state of affairs of the subject of litigation in the interest of justice.
67. This was also the view taken in Guruvayoor Devaswom Managing Committee v. C.K. Rajan MANU/SC/0582/2003 : (2003)7SCC546 , Shivajirao Nilangekar Patil v. Dr. Mahesh Madhav Gosavi MANU/SC/0120/1986 : [1987]1SCR458 and Chairman & MD, BPL Ltd. v. S.P. Gururaja and Ors. MANU/SC/0804/2003 : AIR2003SC4536 .
68. In K.K. Bhalla v. State of M.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0234/2006 : AIR2006SC898 , it was stated:
The Appellant has brought to the notice of the High Court that a malady has been prevailing in the department of the State of Madhya Pradesh and the JDA. It may be true that the Appellant did not file any application questioning similar allotments but it is well-settled if an illegality is brought to the notice of the court, it can in certain situations exercise its power of judicial review suo motu....
69. This Court times without number, however, has laid down the law as regard limited scope of public interest litigation. It sounded note of caution for entertaining public interest litigation in service matters [See Dr. B. Singh v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0211/2004 : AIR2004SC1923 ], in questioning the validity or otherwise of a statute or when a statute is enacted in violation of the direction of a superior court [See Ashok Kumar Thakur v. State of Bihar and Ors. MANU/SC/0011/1996 : AIR1996SC75 . But, we cannot also shut our eyes to the fact that this Court has entertained a large number of public interest litigations for protection of environmental and/ or ecology. [See M.C. Mehta group of cases and T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0596/2005 : AIR2005SC4256 ]
70. Public interest litigations, thus, have been entertained more frequently where a question of violation of the provisions of the statutes governing the environmental or ecology of the country has been brought to its notice in the matter of depletion of forest areas and/ or when the executive while exercising its administrative functions or making subordinate legislations has interfered with the ecological balance with impunity. The High Court of Bombay, therefore, cannot be faulted with for entertaining the writ petition as a public interest litigation.
PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION
71. Before us, the learned Counsel appearing for the parties have relied on several principles of interpretation of statute.
72. The golden rule of interpretation is that unless literal meaning given to a document leads to anomaly or absurdity, the principles of literal interpretation should be adhered to. [See Compack (P) Ltd. v. CCE MANU/SC/1155/2005 : 2005(189)ELT3(SC) , Gurudevdatta VKSSS Maryadit v. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0191/2001 : [2001]2SCR654 , Dayal Singh v. Union of India MANU/SC/0058/2003 : [2003]1SCR714 and Swedish Match AB v. Securities and Exchange Board, India MANU/SC/0693/2004 : AIR2004SC4219 ].
73. The learned Judges of the High Court as also this Court have been taken through the provisions of the MRTP Act, those of the DCR and in particular DCR 58 as framed in 1991 as well as in 2001 times without number. With the assistance of different counsel appearing for different purpose, we have read, re-read and re-read several provisions. Before us, several principles, canons and rules of interpretation have been emphasized. We have not only been taken through various decisions of this Court but also various authorities and treatises dealing with the subject of interpretation of statutes.
74. We have also been asked by the learned Counsel for the parties to interpret the impugned legislation in the light of constitutional scheme and in particular Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India, the provisions of the MRTP Act, the doctrine of sustainable development and various other principles. In the aforementioned situation, it is not possible for us to take recourse to the golden rule.
75. As would appear from the discussions made hereinafter, we are, however, of the opinion that for correct interpretation of DCR 58, the principles of purposive interpretation should be applied.
76. In Francis Bennion's Statutory Interpretation, purposive construction has been described in the following manner:
A purposive construction of an enactment is one which gives effect to the legislative purpose by-
(a) following the literal meaning of the enactment where that meaning is in accordance with the legislative purpose (in this Code called a purposive-and-literal construction), or
(b) applying a strained meaning where the literal meaning is not in accordance with the legislative purpose (in the Code called a purposive-and- strained construction).
77. In K.L. Gupta and Ors. v. The Bombay Municipal Corporation and Ors. MANU/SC/0353/1967 : [1968]1SCR274 , it was stated:
Before examining the contentions on the points of law raised in this case, it is necessary to appreciate what the Act sought to achieve and why it was brought on the statute book. In order to do this, it is necessary to take stock of the position at the time of its enactment so that attention may be focussed on the situation calling for a remedy and how the legislature sought to tackle it....
78. However, the pith of this statement has now found form in the doctrine of purposive construction, as accepted by this Court in several cases.
79. In Maruti Udyog Ltd. v. Ram Lal and Ors. MANU/SC/0056/2005 : (2005)ILLJ853SC , while interpreting the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the rule of purposive construction was followed.
80. In Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0073/1987 : [1987]2SCR1 this Court stated:
If a statute is looked at, in the context of its enactment, with the glasses of the statute-maker, provided by such context, its scheme, the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take colour and appear different than when the statute is looked at without the glasses provided by the context. With these glasses we must look at the Act as a whole and discover what each section, each clause, each phrase and each word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the scheme of the entire Act
81. In 'The Interpretation and Application of Statutes', Reed Dickerson, at p.135 discussed the subject while dealing with the importance of context of the statute in the following terms:
... The essence of the language is to reflect, express, and perhaps even affect the conceptual matrix of established ideas and values that identifies the culture to which it belongs. For this reason, language has been called "conceptual map of human experience.
82. In Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd. v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh MANU/SC/0479/1990 : (1990)IILLJ70SC , this Court referred to the following passage from Hans Kelsen's Pure Theory Law of Law:
The legal act applying a legal norm may be performed in such a way that it conforms (a) with the one or the other of the different meanings of the legal norm, (b) with the will of the norm- creating authority that is to be determined somehow, (c) with the expression which the norm- creating authority has chosen, (d) with the one or the other of the contradictory norms, or (e) the concrete case to which the two contradictory norms refer may be decided under the assumption that the two contradictory norms annul each other. In all these cases, the law to be applied constitutes only a frame within which several applications are possible, whereby every act is legal that stays within the frame.
[See also High Court of Gujarat v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat MANU/SC/0214/2003 : [2003]2SCR799 , Indian Handicrafts Emporium and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0640/2003 : AIR2003SC3240 and Deepal Girishbhai Soni and Ors. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd., Baroda MANU/SC/0246/2004 : AIR2004SC2107 ]
83. In Balram Kumawat v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0628/2003 : AIR2003SC3268 this Court held that if special purpose is to be served even by a special statute, the same may not always be given any narrow and pedantic, literal and lexical construction nor doctrine of strict construction should always be adhered to.
84. In Pratap Singh v. State of Jharkhand and Anr. MANU/SC/0075/2005 : 2005CriLJ3091 , this Court emphasized assignment of contextual meaning to a statute having regard to the constitutional as well as international law operating in the field. Strict adherence to the procedure, subject to just exceptions, was highlighted therein.
85. However, in P.S. Sathappan (Dead) By LRS. v. Andhra Bank Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0873/2004 : AIR2004SC5152 , it was observed that in the guise of purposive construction one cannot interpret a section in a manner which would lead to a conflict between two sub-sections of the same section.
86. Having noticed the principles of purposive construction, we may take note of certain other principles which are necessary to be considered for proper interpretation of DCR 58.
87. It is well-settled principle of law that in the absence of any context indicating a contrary intention, the same meaning would be attached to the word used in the latter as is given to them in the earlier statute. It is trite that the words or expression used in a statute before and after amendment should be given the same meaning. When the legislature uses the same words in a similar connection, it is to be presumed that in the absence of any context indicating a contrary intention, the same meaning should attach to the words.
88. In Venkata Subamma and Anr. v. Ramayya and Ors. MANU/PR/0003/1932, it is stated that an Act should be interpreted having regard to its history and the meaning given to a word cannot be read in a different way than what was interpreted in the earlier repealed section.
89. It is also a fundamental proposition of construction that the effect of deletion of words must receive serious consideration while interpreting a statute as this has been repeatedly affirmed by this Court in a series of judgments. [See Commr. of Income-tax/Excess Profits Tax, Bombay City v. Bhogilal Laherchand including Batliboi and Co., Bombay MANU/SC/0059/1953 : [1954]25ITR50(SC) , The Mangalore Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. The Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal MANU/SC/0232/1978 : [1978]113ITR655(SC) , His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. State of Kerala and Anr. MANU/SC/0445/1973 : AIR1973SC1461 and Onkarlal Nandlal v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. MANU/SC/0321/1985 : AIR1986SC2146 .
90. It is furthermore well-known that when the statute makes a distinction between the two phrases and one of the two is expressly deleted, it is contrary to the cardinal principle of statutory construction to hold that what is deleted is brought back into the statute and finds place in words which were already there in the first place.
91. In Charles Bradlaugh v. Henry Lewis Clarke (1883) 8 AC 354, Lord Watson as regards conscious omission from the statute stated the law, thus:
I see no reason to suppose that all these omissions were accidental, and as little reason to suppose that the enactments with regard to personal disabilities were intentionally left out, whilst the express mention made of common informers was omitted through accident or inadvertence.
92. It is also a well-settled principle of law that common sense construction rule should be taken recourse to in certain cases as has been adumbrated in Halsbury's Laws of England (Fourth Edition) Volume 44(1) (Reissue). We would refer to the said principle in some details later.
INTERPRETATION OF ACT AND REGULATIONS
93. DCR 58 has been attempted to be interpreted in more than one manner by the learned Counsel appearing for the parties.
94. DCR 58 was made to revive and resurrect neighbourhoods, foster development, regenerate lands which had become sterile, encourage the shifting of textile mills (thereby reducing the attendant strain and industrial activity places on civil amenities) and pay off chronic arrears and dues of workers, banks institutions, statutory dues, etc. In its operation and implementation new DCR 58 would also unlock large real estate and make it available to residents.
95. A statute, it is well known, is to be read as a whole. Subordinate legislation indisputably has to be read in the light of the provisions of the Act whereunder it has been made. It, however, must be read having regard to the purpose and object for which the statute is made.
96. The MRTP Act provides for formulation of regional plans and development plan. The planning authority, before a plan is finalized, is required to see that the provisions thereof have been fully complied with. The MRTP Act provides for appointment of a town planning officer who possesses requisite qualification. The MRTP Act lays down the matters which are mandatorily required to be considered by the planning authority in all the stages, namely, survey, preparation, submission and sanction of development plan. While doing so, it is bound to take into consideration a large number of factors as specified therein. The State has been conferred with a special power to frame development control regulations in terms of Section 159(2) of the MRTP Act. Development Control Regulations have been framed in terms of the said provisions. The State has furthermore been given a power to supervise and maintain control over the planning authorities. Such control may be exercised in more than one manner. The planning authority is not only required to obtain statutory sanction and approval wherever applicable, but the State, has also been conferred with a special power to make a development plan subject, of course, to the condition that the same shall not change the character of such development plan.
97. Section 22 of the MRTP Act provides for the contents of the development plan, i.e., to be divided into several areas for allocating the use of land for the purposes as, for example, residential or commercial, proposals for designation of land for public purposes, proposal for designation of areas for open spaces, playgrounds, stadia, zoological gardens, green belts, nature reserves, sanctuaries, dairies, transports and communications, such as roads, highways, parkways, railways, waterways, canals and airports, including their extension and development, water supply, drainage, sewerage, etc. and reservation of land for community facilities and services. Whereas designation and/ or reservation of areas for certain public purposes would vary from place to place, it must take care of not only the public purposes but also several others including open spaces. Water supply, drainage, sewerage, and other public utilities including electricity and gas or highways or waterways, schools, etc., however, would be considered to be equally important.
98. A planning authority, therefore, must take into consideration all the relevant factors, although in a given case, one gets priority over the other. Ordinarily, it would not be for the court to substitute its decision to that of the planning authority unless an appropriate case is made out therefore. When, however, question of public interest comes up, the court indisputably would try to delicately balance the different factors, if possible.
99. Both open space as also the other factors relevant for making the regulation would be in public interest. The question would, however, be as to which is of greater public interest. Public interest, thus, would be a relevant factor also for interpretation of the statute. Public interest so far as maintenance of ecology is concerned pertains to a constitutional scheme comprising of Articles 14, 21, 48A and 51A(g) of the Constitution of India, the other factors are no less significant. [See also T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad v. Union of India and Ors. : (2002)10SCC606 , N.D. Jayal and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0649/2003 : (2004)9SCC362 and Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0686/1996 : AIR1996SC2715 ]. All concerned, namely, operating agencies, the State Government, the National Textile Mills as also BIFR interpreting the said regulation opined that sharing of land is imperative, but the question remains, to what extent? Whether radical changes were made in the year 2003, when the State made the aforementioned clarification would again be a question which is required to be posed and answered. Was such a clarification in consonance with the reports of Charles Correa Committee and the Ranjit Deshmukh Committee? Did 2000 acres of vacant land which would have been otherwise available come down to 50 acres? Had any balance been struck between the original concept of sharing of lands by Bombay Municipal Corporation, MHADA and the mill owners? It is in the aforementioned backdrop, the nature of change must be considered. The amendment in 2001, therefore, must be interpreted having regard to the provisions of the MRTP Act which professed increase in the ecological interest by providing more open space and not decreasing the same, but again the question would be "was there any reduction"? The amendments in the regulation must be construed in furtherance of the legislative policy and not in derogation thereof. But, while doing so, the past experience of the State which paved the necessities for modifying the earlier regulation should not be forgotten.
100. A statutory scheme herein also by way of Section 22 clearly speaks about open spaces. The Legislative Act confers guidelines which advocates the necessity of environmental impact assessment. The State, when it exercises its power under Section 37 of the MRTP Act is required to act within the four-corners of the Act. Any modification or amendment must address the environmental consequences together with other relevant factors.
101. As a logical corollary, it must also be determined as to whether the amendments amounted to a minor modification or substantive one. Literal interpretation of the Act and the Rules would give rise to many anomalies. It would not advance the object and purport of the Act. It would also create difficulties in implementing the statutory scheme.
102. Having said so, we have no other option but, as indicated hereinbefore, to take recourse to the principles of purposive construction and interpret DCR 58 in accordance with the scope and object of the Act. For the said purpose, we may also have to consider various aspects of the matter. We would make an attempt in this behalf.
SCOPE OF JUDICIAL REVIEW VIS-À-VIS LEGISLATIVE POLICY
103. A policy decision, as is well known, should not be lightly interfered with but it is difficult to accept the submissions made on behalf of the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellants that the courts cannot exercise their power of judicial review at all. By reason of any legislation whether enacted by the legislature or by way of subordinate legislation, the State gives effect to its legislative policy. Such legislation, however, must not be ultra vires the Constitution. A subordinate legislation apart from being intra vires the Constitution, should not also be ultra vires the parent Act under which it has been made. A subordinate legislation, it is trite, must be reasonable and in consonance with the legislative policy as also give effect to the purport and object of the Act and in good faith.