MANU/SC/1368/2002
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 3092, 3123, 3214 and 3300 of 2002
Decided On: 17.12.2002
Appellants: Cellular Operators Association of India and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
G.B. Pattanaik, C.J., H.K. Sema and S.B. Sinha, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Soli J. Sorabjee, Attornery General, Mukul Rohatgi, Additional Solicitor General, P. Chidambaram, C.S. Vaidyanathan, Gopal Subramanium, Ram Jethmalani, Jaideep Gupta, Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Ashok H. Desai, P.N. Mishra, Manjul Bajpai, Indu Malhotra, Kashi Vishweshwar, Praveen Thomas, Gopal Jain, R.N. Karanjawala, Ruby Singh Ahuja, Meghna Mishra, Manik Karanjawala, Bina Gupta, Vanita Bhargava, Garima Dewan, Divya Roy, Jitendra Acharya, Avinash Modi, Sanveer Mehlwal, N. Mahabir, Manish Singhvi, Sunil Mathews, Anand Mishra, Ashim Sood, Ajay Sharma, P. Parmeswaran, Ramji Srinivasan, V. Raj Kumar, Yogesh Gupta, Amit Bhandari, Rajiv Mehta, Milind Sathe, Ramesh Babu, M.R., Rudreshwar Singh, Tapesh Kumar Singh, Manish Tiwari, Shishir Pinaki and Sanjay Jain, Advs
Subject: Media and Communication
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 100 ; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 2(9); Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 227; Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 9; Customs Act, 1962 - Section 130-E(b), Customs Act, 1962 - Section 130E; Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 [repealed] - Section 17, Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 [repealed] - Section 27, Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 [repealed] - Section 4; Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 - Section 7B; Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 - Section 11A; Monopolies And Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 [repealed] - Section 5; Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 11(1), Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 11(1)(a), Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 11(1)(a)(i), Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14A, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 15, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 18, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 18(1)
Relevant Section:
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 - Section 11(1)
Cases Referred:
Union of India and Anr. v. Paras Laminates (P) Ltd. MANU/SC/0173/1991; West Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission v. C.E.S.C. Ltd etc. etc. MANU/SC/0859/2002; Collector of Customs, Bombay v. Swastic Woolens (P.) Ltd. and Ors MANU/SC/0095/1988; Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0623/1996; State of M.P. and Ors. v. Nandlal Jaiswal and Ors. MANU/SC/0034/1986; G.B. Mahajan and Ors. v. Jalgaon Municipal Council and Ors. MANU/SC/0284/1991; Balraj Taneja and Anr. v. Sunil Madan and Anr. MANU/SC/0551/1999; Union of India and Ors. v. Manager, Jain and Associates MANU/SC/0084/2001; Rattan Dev v. Pasam Devi MANU/SC/0807/2002; B.S. Sharma v. State of Haryana and Anr. MANU/SC/0709/2000; Union of India v. Parma Nanda MANU/SC/0636/1989; Om Kumar and Ors. v. Union of India MANU/SC/0704/2000; Permian Basin Area Rate case 399 US 747 : 20 L ED 2d 312; Universal Camera Corporation v. National Labor Relations Board 340 US 474; Union of India v. Tarachand Gupta and Bros. MANU/SC/0220/1971; Anisminic Ltd. v. The Foreign Compensation Commissioner, Lord Reid 213; Union of India and Ors. v. Dinesh Engineering Corporation and Anr. MANU/SC/0575/2001; Home Secretaiy, U.T. of Chandigarh and Anr. v. Darshjit Singh Grewal and Ors. MANU/SC/0551/1993; State of West Bengal and Ors. v. Nuruddin Mallick and Ors. MANU/SC/0619/1998
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  13

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  4

Relied On
  1

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.3.2002 of the Telecom Disputes, Appellate and Settlement Tribunal, New in P. No. 1 of 2001 (MANU/TD/0006/2002)
Case Note:
Consumer - Jurisdiction - Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal dismissed Appellant's application, filed under Section 14 of Act, challenging decision of Government wherein, permission was granted to Fixed Service Providers to offer WLL with limited mobility - Hence, this Appeal - Whether, under Section 14 of Act, Tribunal had jurisdiction to decide matter, and decision of Tribunal was erroneous - Held, relying upon case State of West Bengal and Ors. v. Nuruddin Mallick and Ors., it was inappropriate for Court to substitute itself for statutory authorities to decide matter - Chapter IV containing Section 14 was inserted by amendment of year 2002 and with an object to increase investors' confidence and create a level playing field between public and private operators - However, purpose and object for which Appellate Tribunal was constituted, and provision dealing with ousting jurisdiction of Civil Court, under Section 15 of Act, power of Appellate Tribunal was quite wide, and was indicated in statute itself - Thus, exercising appellate power or original power, could have no application for limiting jurisdiction of Appellate Tribunal under Act - Tribunal was original authority to adjudicate any dispute between licensor and licensee or between two or more service providers or between service provider and group of consumers and self-contained restrictions and limitations of Court under Judge made law, could not be imported - Hence, Tribunal had power to adjudicate any dispute between persons under Clause (a) of Section 14 and due weight could be attached both to recommendations of TRAI and GOT-IT - Appeal allowed.
Ratio Decidendi:
"No person shall wrongly challenge jurisdiction of Courts, unless expressly provided in statute, and illegal and arbitrary."
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
JUDGMENT
Authored By : G.B. Pattanaik, S.B. Sinha
G.B. Pattanaik, C.J.
1. These appeals are under Section 18 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 [hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'] against the decision of the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal [hereinafter referred to as 'the tribunal']. The appellants are Cellular Mobile Service Providers (CMSPs) and the private respondents are the Fixed Service Providers (FSPs). The appellants approached the tribunal under Section 14 of the Act, challenging the decision of the Government dated 25.1.2001, permitting the Fixed Service Providers to offer WLL with limited mobility. Be it be stated that the appellants had also assailed the recommendations of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India [for short TRAI] dated 8.1.2001. But after the Government decision dated 25.1.2001, the petition was amended and the subsequent decision of the Government was also challenged. Before the tribunal, large number of issues on facts and law had been raised, which can be broadly enumerated as under:
(i) The decision of the government is vitiated for non-compliance of Section 11(1)(a)(i) of the Act.
(ii) The NTP-1999 never contemplated of WLL with limited mobility and as such the decision to provide WLL with limited mobility to the Fixed Service Providers is beyond the policy in question.
(iii) The permission to offer WLL with limited mobility is arbitrary, unreasonable and unjust decision on the part of the Government.
(iv) TRAI, while recommending by its letter dated 8.1.2001 had indicated for compliance of two conditions, but the government decision ultimately taken is contrary to the said recommendations and, therefore, is vitiated.
(v) The ultimate decision of the government in fact does not deal with the question of level playing field between FSPs offering WLL with limited mobility and CMSPs, as a result of the discriminatory regulatory regime.
(vi) The impugned decision conferring the benefit of WLL with limited mobility to the Fixed Service Providers is nothing but a Cellular Mobile Service in SDCA and as such is a substitution for the same and such a substitution ought not to have been allowed.
(vii) The Government decision allowing Fixed Service Providers to provide WLL with limited mobility without any entry fee and without any charges for allocation of spectrum and even without a competitive bidding, amount to violation of the recommendations made by the TRAI dealing with new CMSPs licensees.
2. The stand of the Union Government as well as the Fixed Service Providers and also the consumers before the tribunal was that there was no prohibition in the Policy of 1999 (NTP-1999) either for introduction of any new technology in consumers interest nor is there any bar on the power of the competent authority to accept the recommendations of the TRAI and take a final decision regarding permitting inexpensive and advantageous system for the consumers. It was also urged that both before the TRAI and also before the Special Committee appointed by the Prime Minister, long deliberations had been made and the cellular operators were extensively heard and then on the basis of the recommendations of the Special Committee, the Prime Minister took the decision. When a highly expertise body has recommended, which was ultimately accepted by the government, it would not be for the Court to interfere with the same unless the so-called recommendations are found to be either arbitrary or contrary to law or in violation of the principles of natural justice. That being so, it would not be for the appellate tribunal to interfere with the well considered decision of the Government of India in approving the recommendations of the specially constituted Committee and in permitting the Fixed Service Providers to use WLL with limited mobility mechanism in the larger interest of the society. It was also contended before the tribunal that before making any recommendations, the Committee had duly examined the question of level playing field and also whether it is a substituted form of mobile service or not and such findings of the expertise body are not to be interfered with by the appellate tribunal in exercise of its limited powers. On behalf of the Fixed Service Providers as well as the consumers, several instances were also given before the appellate tribunal as to how the so-called grievance of the cellular operator is nothing but a shedding of crocodile tears and they have been benefiting and are not in any way prejudicially affected by the introduction of WLL with limited mobility. According to the consumers, the WLLM is particularly helpful to increase tele-density in rural and semi-urban areas and, therefore, any attempt to increase the tele-density and to penetrate the areas which do not have telephone connections, must be welcomed. It was also contended that the steps taken by the government in providing the facility of WLL with limited mobility are for providing affordable and cheaper telecommunication services as well as for increasing the tele-density in the urban, semi-urban and rural areas and that should not be stalled, even if there has been minor infraction of any provisions of the Act or the Rules, particularly when it is in the larger interest of the consumers. It was stated before us by the counsel appearing for the parties that the hearing before the tribunal continued for 26 days and large number of contentions on facts as well as law were urged and quite a number of decisions had been cited. The tribunal however by the impugned judgment, while dismissing the application filed before it, came to the conclusion that--
(a) The WLL with limited mobility offers benefits to consumers in rural and urban areas and it would provide uninterrupted trouble free service, as the subscriber does not have to wait endlessly for a mechanic to come and rectify the fault in the wire line.
(b) A subscriber having WLL with limited mobility can dispense with the wire-line phone.
(c) The decisions to offer WLL with limited mobility is a policy decision of the government, which the government was free to take and as such a policy decision cannot be assailed either by the cellular operators nor the tribunal can interfere with the same.
(d) The jurisdiction of the tribunal is not wider than that of the Supreme Court and within the parameters of that jurisdiction, the tribunal cannot interfere with the decision of the government.
(e) The cellular operators unequivocally indicated by their letter dated 25.9.2000 that they had no objection to the introduction of limited mobility provided level playing field conditions are maintained and, therefore, they are not entitled to assail the decision of introduction of WLL with limited mobility.
(f) The so-called decision of the government is not a case of mindless change of policy in a hurry nor is the decision arbitrary or mala fide and the government is entitled to deviate from a policy decision and adopt another policy, which cannot be reviewed by the appellate tribunal.
(g) A new technology has come into existence, which technology is much more beneficial to the consumers and which technology would make it possible for increasing the tele-density in the country, the same should not be interfered with.
(h) The charges a consumer will have to pay for WLL with limited mobility will be much less than the charges levied by the Cell operators and the CDMA network casts much less to build and operate than GSM and further CDMA is far superior to GSM.
(i) The Cellular operators themselves had been allowed to migrate and they cannot be heard to complain about, when such migration is permitted to Fixed Service Providers.
(j) The fear expressed by the cellular operators is either feigned or imaginary.
(k) The cellular operators can also use latest technology including WLL with limited mobility and so also the Fixed Service Providers.
(l) A reduction of licence fee and entry fee into areas hitherto unavailable to the cellular operators like PCO is sufficient compensation and concession.
(m) There cannot be any legitimate expectation and the theory of legitimate expectation has no application. But on the other hand, it will be an illegitimate expectation.
With these conclusions, the tribunal having dismissed the application, the cellular operator are in appeals before this Court.
3. On behalf of the appellants arguments were advanced in this Court by Mr. P. Chidambaram, Mr. Ram Jethmalani and Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan. On behalf of the respondents, arguments were advanced by the Ld. Attorney General, Dr. A.M. Singhvi, Mr. Ashok H. Desai and Mr. P.N. Misra.
4. The arguments of the appellants can be summarized thus:
(1) Though large number of highly debatable issues had been argued, the tribunal did not make any reference to those issues and such non-consideration and non-disposal would be an important question of law for which the order has to be interfered with.
(2) In view of the divergence between the recommendation of the TRAI and the ultimate decision of the government, it was obligatory for the government to act in accordance with the 5th proviso to Section 11(1) and such non-compliance vitiates the ultimate decision. The tribunal committed error in not answering the said issue.
(3) Even the tribunal failed to answer the question, whether the WLL with limited mobility is nothing but a substitution of the cellular operation and such non-answering vitiates the ultimate decision.
(4) The tribunal also did not positively answer the question whether introduction of WLL with limited mobility was permissible under NTP-1999 and whether the technology itself was known as early as in 1994-95.
(5) On the question of level playing field, it is contended that there has been no discussion or appreciation of the materials placed and in fact, no finding has been given though the tribunal has used the expression 'that some compensation has been provided for to the cellular operators'.
(6) The conclusions of the tribunal without appreciating the evidence and materials adduced and without being backed by any reasons are unsustainable and the same have to be interfered with.
(7) The tribunal also has assumed several things even though not borne out by records and such assumption without any reference to any materials vitiates the ultimate conclusion and as such cannot be upheld by this Court.
(8) The tribunal disposed of the matter broadly on the ground that it is in the consumer's interest without focusing its attention to the several infirmities with the decision of the government and as such the impugned judgment of the tribunal has to be interfered with.
(9) The administrative ministry which formulated the NTP, having itself interpreted NTP-1999, to hold that it does not permit FSPs to provide any mobile service, the subsequent decision permitting the FSPs to have WLL with limited mobility is nothing but an arbitrary action and the tribunal committed error in not examining this aspect.
(10) The migration package was accepted both by the FSPs and CMSPs under the new policy regime of NTP-1999, and the provisions of NTP-99 became part of their respective licence agreement and when there has been a change of the same, it tantamount to violation of guarantees included in the conditions of licence.
(11) It was also urged that the appellate tribunal under the Act, exercises both the original jurisdiction as well as the appellate jurisdiction and the same is wide enough and not circumscribed by the jurisdiction of a court under Article 226 and, therefore, the tribunal committed serious error by restricting its jurisdiction and it amounts to non-exercise of jurisdiction vested in law.
(12) Lastly, it was urged that the objects and reasons of the amended provisions were to strengthen the authority, so as to increase investors' confidence and create a level playing field between the public and private operators. Such object will be frustrated if the dispute regarding the level playing field is not answered and is brushed aside, as has been done by the tribunal, on the ground of public interest and as such the impugned decision of the tribunal cannot be upheld.
The arguments on behalf of the respondents on the other hand can be summarized thus:
1. The level of judicial scrutiny and the extent of judicial intervention in any particular case, depends-upon the nature of the impugned decision and its subject matter as well as the composition of the decision making body.
2. When decision of expert bodies or tribunal dealing with technical, scientific, academic or economic matters are assailed, courts grant greater latitude to the decision of such expert bodies and while exercising original or appellate jurisdiction, greater deference to such decision is accorded. Judicial intervention is restricted to and is available if there is a breach of a constitutional or a statutory provision or the approach adopted is totally illegal or if the decision is vitiated by mala fides, properly pleaded and proven. Judicial scrutiny would not extend to questioning the decision on the ground that it is unwise or unscientific or inappropriate or a better decision could have been given. The limitation for judicial intervention is inherent and that being so, the impugned order of the tribunal has to be examined from that stand point.
(3) According to the Attorney General, the very composition of TRAI as well as the composition of GOT-IT constituted by the Prime Minister, indicates that it consisted of highly qualified technical experts and it is on their recommendation, the Prime Minister took the final decision. That being so, it would not be appropriate either for the tribunal or for this Court to interfere with the same unless any statutory infirmity is found or it is established that the decision is vitiated by mala fides.
(4) According to the Ld. Attorney General, not only the recommendations of the TRAI confer several benefits to the cellular operators as against the basic service operators, but also GOT-IT granted further concessions in the matter of revenue share percentage, which in the language of the tribunal, fully compensated the cellular operators and this answers the level playing field.
(5) It is urged that no doubt the judgment of the tribunal could have been better written, but that itself would be no ground for interference by this Court, when the Court's jurisdiction to interfere is restricted to interference on a substantial question of law. According to the respondents, if the judgment of the tribunal is read between the lines, then it must be held that all questions raised have been answered and findings had been given and as such there is no justification for interfering with that decision.
(6) It is also contended that the consumers interest as well as tele-density of the rural and semi-urban areas are two vital considerations for any authority under the Act and when the tribunal has found that the introduction of WLL with limited mobility would subserve the aforesaid two vital requirements, this Court should not interfere with the said conclusions on facts in exercise of powers under Article 136.
(7) According to Dr. Singhvi, the learned counsel for the basic telecom operators, the march of technology, the licence terms permitting WLL, huge compensation granted to the cellular operators and a policy decision of the government are the four basic reasons for which the tribunal did not interfere with the decision of the government and as such, it would not be appropriate for this Court to interfere with the said well-reasoned judgment of the tribunal.
(8) According to Dr. Singhvi, the grievances of the cellular operators are nothing but shedding of crocodile tears inasmuch as even the cellular operators have given bid for astronomical figure even after the impugned judgment and as such the grievance is not genuine.
(9) It is contended that the tribunal having given finding on question of facts, the same ought not to be interfered with by this Court when the appellate jurisdiction can be invoked only when a substantial question of law arises.
(10) Lastly, it is contended that there being large number of consultations and open house discussions both by the TRAI as well as the GOT-IT and the cellular operators having been heard at length and the consultation papers on WLL(M) being quite extensive, the decision of the TRAT as well as that of the government, must be held to be a well considered decision and the same does not require any interference by a tribunal or this Court.
On behalf of the consumers, it was specifically urged that in a public utility service, what is of paramount importance is the consumers' interest which in turn pre-supposes that the consumers must get the benefit of least expensive service and the consumers should not be denied the efficiency and benefit of the technological advancement. Both the TRAI and the government decision, kept the aforesaid considerations in view and even the tribunal also in the impugned decision duly borne in mind the aforesaid considerations and, therefore, the ultimate conclusion of the tribunal should not be interfered with by this Court.
5. In view of the submissions made by the counsel for the parties, the first question that arises is, what are the parameters for exercise of appellate powers of the Supreme Court, in view of the provisions contained in Section 18 of the Act. Section 18(1) is extracted herein-below in extenso:
18. Appeal to Supreme Court - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the grounds specified in Section 100 of that Code.
The aforesaid provision, unequivocally indicates that against an order of the tribunal, an appeal would lie to the Supreme Court, on one or more of the grounds, specified in Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Under Section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code, an appeal lies to the High Court for every decree passed in appeal by any Court subordinate to the High Court, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law. Under Sub-section (4) of Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, if the High Court is satisfied that a substantial Question of law is involved, then itself formulates a question and under Sub-section (5), an appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and under Sub-section (5), the respondent has the right to argue that the case does not involve any such question. Notwithstanding the fact that the powers of this Court under Section 18 is circumscribed by the applicability of Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, in the case in hand there has been no formulation of the question, as required under Sub-section (4) of Section 100, but at any rate, it is only a substantial question of law arising out of the order of the tribunal, which can be urged in this appeal. It is in this context, Dr. A.M. Singhvi appearing for the basic operators, Mr. Ashok H. Desai, appearing for the consumers and Ld. Attorney General, appearing for the Union of India had urged that no substantial question of law arises, particularly, when the appellate tribunal has come to the conclusion that it is in the interest of the consumers on the recommendations made by the TRAI and the further advice of the GOT-IT, constituted by the Prime Minister, the government has taken the decision. According to the learned counsel for the respondents, whether permitting the basic operators to have the privilege of WLL with limited mobility is in the interest of the consumers and is on account of modern technological development, is a question of fact and the conclusion thereon has been based on the basis of the report of the Expert Committee, constituted by the Prime Minister and the government has merely implemented the same.
6. Mr. P. Chidambaram, Mr. Ram Jethmalani and Mr. C.S. Vaidyanathan, appearing for the appellants, on the other hand contended that non-consideration of the points raised and non-consideration of the relevant materials and failure to exercise jurisdiction vested in the tribunal would itself constitute a substantial question of law for this Court to interfere with the ultimate conclusion of the tribunal. It would, therefore, be necessary to examine the extent and parameters of the jurisdiction of the tribunal itself under Section 14 of the Act. Section 14 is extracted herein-below in extenso:
Section 14. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal. The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to-
(a) adjudicate any dispute-
(i) between a licensor and a licensee:
(ii) between two or more service providers;
(iii) between a service provider and a group of consumers;
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of matters relating to-
(A) the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade practice which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission established under Sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969);
(B) the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consumer Redressal Commission established under Section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986);
(C) dispute between telegraph authority and any other person referred to in Sub-section (1) of Section 7B of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885);
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority under this Act.
According to the counsel appearing for the appellants that the original Act was amended in the year 2000 and Chapter IV was inserted, under which the tribunal was constituted as an Expert Body, with the main object to increase investors' confidence and to create a level playing field between the public and the private operators and also the fact that the tribunal has both the original jurisdiction as well as the appellate jurisdiction, with only one appeal to the Supreme Court on a substantial question of law, it would be reasonable to hold that the tribunal has unfettered jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute raised as well as to decide the legality of an order of the Central Government or even the opinion of the TRAI or any other expert body and the jurisdiction should be much more wider, when the legislature have ousted the jurisdiction of the civil court to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter, which the appellate tribunal is empowered by or under the Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under the Act, as provided in Section 15. According to Mr. Chidambaram, the tribunal under the Act has all the powers conferred expressly by the statute and also it has all the incidental and ancillary powers, which are necessary to make fully effective the express grant of statutory powers. Within the bounds of its jurisdiction it has all the powers expressly and impliedly granted under the statute. Reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Union of India and Anr. v. Paras Laminates (P) Ltd. MANU/SC/0173/1991 : [1990]186ITR722(SC) .
7. Learned Attorney General, appearing for the Union of India, on the other hand contended that the level of judicial scrutiny and the extent of judicial intervention depends upon the nature of the impugned decision and its subject matter as well as the composition of the decision making body. It was urged that decisions of expert bodies or tribunals dealing with technical, scientific, academic or economic matters are accorded greater latitude and the Courts whether exercising original or appellate jurisdiction accord much greater reference to such decisions and judicial intervention is restricted and is available if there is a clear breach of a constitutional or a statutory provision or the approach adopted is totally illegal or if the decision is vitiated by mala fides, properly pleaded and proven. According to the learned Attorney General, judicial scrutiny in these cases cannot extend to questioning the decision on the ground that it is unwise or unscientific or inappropriate or that another decision would have been better or more sound. The rationale for minimal judicial interference is that the subject matter of the decision is not amenable to judicial intervention except on the limited grounds, as aforesaid. It is, therefore, urged that the self-imposed limitation which applies when the High Court exercises its supervisory jurisdiction in respect of an order of an inferior tribunal, when the High Court is approached under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution, would equally apply to the proceedings and appeals before the tribunal under Section 14 and the impugned judgment of the tribunal has to be scrutinized from that stand point, bearing in mind the limited power of interference conferred on the Supreme Court under Section 18. It is, therefore, urged by the learned Attorney General that the impugned decision of the tribunal cannot be found fault with, merely on the ground that the order is not as detailed as it could have been, particularly when the tribunal has applied its mind not only to the recommendations made by the TRAI but also to the recommendations made by a high powered expert body on the directions of the Prime Minister, namely GOT-IT, which recommendation was accepted by the Prime Minister and the ultimate decision emanated. It is in this connection, learned Attorney General relied upon a recent decision of a three Judge Bench in the case of West Bengal Electricity Regulatory Commission v. C.E.S.C. Ltd etc. etc. MANU/SC/0859/2002 : AIR2002SC3588 , wherein this Court has held that the rule of prudence in law is that the appellate power is not to be exercised for the purpose of substituting one subjective satisfaction with another, without there being any specific reason for such substitution and further in regard to the exercise of appellate power against the orders of expert tribunals, on facts, the appellate court which is not an expert forum should be doubly careful while interfering with such expert forum's findings on facts. While coming to the aforesaid conclusion, this Court relied upon a series of earlier cases and held that " the appellate power of the High Court statutorily is not hedged in by any restriction, but in our opinion, the High Court merely because it has unrestricted appellate power, should not interfere with the considered order of the commission unless it is satisfied that the order of the commission is perverse, not based on evidence or on misreading of evidence, keeping in mind the fact that the commission is an expert body."