MANU/SC/0373/2013
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
I.A. No. 100 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 337 of 1995, I.A. No. 3452 in WP(C) No. 202 of 1995
Decided On: 15.04.2013
Appellants: Centre for Environment Law, WWF-I
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan and C.K. Prasad, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: P.P. Malhotra, ASG, P.S. Narasimha (A.C.), T.S. Doabia, Raj Panjwani, Shyam Divan, Sr. Advs., Sukhbeer Kaur Bajwa, Kiran Bhardwaj, B.K. Prasad, Asha Gopalan Nair, Md. Khithey, D.S. Mahra, Vijay Panjwani, Rahul Chaudhary, Aditya Shamlal, Anitha Shenoy, Hemantika Wahi, Nirman Sharma, Jesal, Gaurav Agrawal, K. Parameshwar, Haris Beeran, P.K. Manohar, Rajeev Kumar Dubey, Shiv Prakash Pandey, Kamlendra Mishra and Vibha Datta Makhija, Advs.
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 48, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51-A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Forest (conservation) Act, 1980 - Section 2; Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 11, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 12, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 12(bb), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2(36), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2(37), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 40, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 41, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 42, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 5A, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 5B, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 5C, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 6, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 8, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 9
Relevant Section:
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 - Section 2; Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 - Section 5A; Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 - Section 12
Cases Referred:
Lafarge Umiam Mining Private Limited, T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0735/2011 : (2011) 7 SCC 338; Sansar Chand v. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0869/2010 : (2010) 10 SCC 604; T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0122/2012 : (2012) 3 SCC 277; Anthropocentric V. Eco-CentricM.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath and Ors. MANU/SC/1007/1997 : (1997) 1 SCC 388
Disposition:
Application Allowed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  4

Mentioned
  1

Case Note:
Environment - Protection of wild animals and birds - Section 2 of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 - Application was sought to decide necessity of a second home for Asiatic Lion (Panthera leo persica), an endangered species, for its long term survival and to protect species from extinction as issue rooted on eco-centrism, which supports protection of all wildlife forms, not just those which was of instrumental value to humans but also those which have intrinsic worth - Hence, this intervention application - Held, while examining necessity of a second home for Asiatic lions, approach should be eco-centric and not anthropocentric and should apply "species best interest standard", that was best interest of Asiatic lions - Further, attention was focused to safeguard interest of species, as species had equal rights to existed on this Earth - However, Asiatic Lion had became critically endangered because of human intervention - Thereby, commission was formed to safeguard these endangered species because these species had a right to live on this earth, just like human beings - Since, it was duty of NBWL to promote conservation and development of wildlife with a view to ensuring ecological and environmental security in country - Therefore, it was viewed that various decisions taken by NBWL that Asiatic lion should have a second home to save it from extinction, due to catastrophes like epidemic, large forest fire etc, which could result in extinction, was justified - Hence, Court was inclined to highlight necessity of an exclusive parliamentary legislation for preservation and protection of endangered species so as to carry out recovery programme before many of species become extinct - Intervention application allowed.

Ratio Decidendi

"It should be duty of every citizen of India to protect and improve natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures."
JUDGMENT
K.S. Panicker Radhakrishnan, J.
Application for Intervention is allowed.
1. We have been called upon to decide the necessity of a second home for Asiatic Lion (Panthera leo persica), an endangered species, for its long term survival and to protect the species from extinction as issue rooted on eco-centrism, which supports the protection of all wildlife forms, not just those which are of instrumental value to humans but those which have intrinsic worth.
FACTS:
2. The Wildlife Institute of India (for short 'WII'), an autonomous institution under the Ministry of Environment and Forests (for short 'MoEF'), Government of India, through its wildlife Biologists had done considerable research at the Gir Forest in the State of Gujarat since 1986. All those studies were geared to provide data which would help for the better management of the Gir forest and enhance the prospects for the long term conservation of lions at Gir, a single habitat of Asiatic lion in the world. The data collected by the Wildlife Biologists highlighted the necessity of a second natural habitat for its long term conservation. Few of the scientists had identified the Asiatic lions as a prime candidate for a re-introduction project to ensure its long term survival. In October 1993, a Population and Habitat Analysis Workshop was held at Baroda, Gujarat. Various issues came for consideration in that meeting and the necessity of a second home for Asiatic lions was one of the issues deliberated upon in that meeting. Three alternative sites for re-introduction of Asiatic lions were suggested for an intensive survey, the details of which are given below:
1. Darrah-Jawaharsagar Wildlife Sanctuary (Rajasthan)
2. Sitamata Wildlife Sanctuary (Rajasthan)
3. Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary (Madhya Pradesh)
3. The Research Advisory Committee of WII recognized the need for a prior survey to assess the potential of those sites. Accordingly, a field survey was conducted. Surveys of the three sites were made during winter as well as summer, to assess water availability during the summer and also to ascertain the changes in human impact on the habitat during the seasons. The surveyors concentrated on ascertaining the extent of forest area in and adjoining the chosen protected areas with the aim of establishing the contiguity of the forested habitat. Attempts were also made to establish the relative abundance of wild ungulate prey in the three sites based on direct sightings as well as on indirect evidence. An assessment of the impact on the people and their livestock on habitat quality in all three sites was also made. of the three sites surveyed, Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary (for short 'Kuno') was found to be the most suitable site for re-introduction in establishing a free ranging population of Asiatic lions. A draft report to that effect was prepared by eminent Scientists like Ravi Chellam, Justus Joshwa, Christy A. Williams and A.J. T. Johnsingh on behalf of WII. The report revealed that the Kuno was a historical distribution range of Asiatic lions. Report also highlighted the necessity of a long term commitment of resources, personnel, the necessity of a comprehensive rehabilitation package, adequate staff and facilities. Committee did not consider the presence of tigers in Kuno to be a major limiting factor, especially since the tigers occur in such low numbers and density. Since lions live in stable social units, report highlighted that it is important to take lions for the translocation also from a single pride. Further, it was also pointed out that genetic consideration would not be a major factor, provided fresh male lions are moved from Gir to Kuno every three to five years and the resident males in Kuno selectively captured for Zoos.
4. State of Madhya Pradesh then undertook a massive rehabilitation package for the villagers settled in and near Kuno so as to push forward the scheme of relocation of Asiatic lions in Kuno. It was noticed that about 1545 families of 24 revenue villages were living inside Kuno and they had to be rehabilitated outside the sanctuary. Since suitable and sufficient revenue land was not available in adjoining areas, it was decided to relocate those villages on degraded protected forests. Since proposed site of resettlement fell in various blocks of protected forest, the use as a rehabilitation purpose involved a legal obligation to obtain prior sanction from MoEF under Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
5. The Secretary (Forests), Government of Madhya Pradesh, therefore, sent a letter dated 24.7.1996 to MoEF seeking final approval of the Central Government in accordance with the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. MoEF, after examining the request of the State of Madhya Pradesh, conveyed its approval under Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for diversion of 3720.9 hectare of forest land for rehabilitation of 18 villages located inside the Kuno, subject to fulfillment of certain conditions. Out of 3720.9 hectare of the 13-forest compartments, 3395.9 hectare forest area of 12 compartments was finally approved by the Government of India for de-notification. Compartment No. P-442 of Umarikaia forest block was left out from the original proposal by Government of India letter dated 1.2.2000 and hence, the released area in first phase had been de-notified after due permission from the Government of India. Forest area of 1263.9 hectare released in the second phase could not be de-notified for want of permission from the Government of India. The Government of India constituted a Monitoring Committee for the effective implementation of the Asiatic Lion Reintroduction Project at Kuno which met on 10.3.2004. The Survey report of WII was discussed in the meeting and it was noticed that Kuno Paipur Sanctuary of M.P. was identified as the project site/and a 20 year project was conceived in three phases as below:
a. Phase I (1995-2000 A.D.) Village relocation and habitat development.
b. Phase II (2000-2005) Fencing at the side, translocation, research and monitoring.
c. Phase III (2005-2015) Eco-development.
It was pointed out in the meeting that, currently, the project was in Phase II and 18 villages had been rehabilitated from Kuno. Further, in the meeting, the Chief Wildlife Warden of Gujarat had, however, opined that there was no commitment on the part of the State of Gujarat for providing lions and the State Government had not agreed for the same. Based on the discussion, the Chairman summed up the consensus which emerged out of the deliberations as follows:
1. A letter from MOS, MoEF should be sent to the Chief Minister of Gujarat, highlighting the project justification with a request to provide lions for translocation to Kuno Palpur Sanctuary.
2. State of Gujarat should be provided with a set of project documents.
3. The Chief Wildlife Warden, MP should prepare a road map with a final detail for translocation of lions from Gir to Kuno.
4. An assessment of prey base in Kuno should be done by WII.
5. No further expenditure should be incurred with a focus on lion; however, funding support for habitat improvement/welfare initiatives for other wild animals can continue.
6. The scheme for rehabilitation of villagers was prepared by the centrally sponsored "Beneficiary-oriented Scheme for Tribal Development". It was stated in the scheme that a total of more than Rs. 1545 lacs would be required for the satisfactory relocation of 1545 families of 24 villages out of the limit of Kuno. Out of 1545 lacs, 1061 lacs had been spent on relocation process. Balance 484 lacs were required to be released for the remaining rehabilitation works. The Chief Wildlife Warden, M.P. had certified the said expenditure.
7. WII, in the meantime, had made a detailed assessment of prey population for lion re-location in Kuno. It was noticed that since re-location of villages from Kuno was complete, Government of M.P. was keen to assess the prey base in the sanctuary so as to plan obtaining lions from Gujarat for re-introduction as early as possible. For the said purpose, the task of evaluating for wild prey base was entrusted to WII. Consequently, the faculty from WII, with the help of 34 forest staff, had undertaken the study of ungulates in Kuno under the guidance of Dr. Raghu Chundawat and carried out the prey assessment exercise from 2.1.2005 to 8.1.2005 and 8.2.2005 to 13.2.2005. A report was filed in June 2006 (July 2006). The Minister of MoEF sent a letter dated 20.7.2006 to the Chief Minister of Gujarat for translocation of two numbers of lions to Kuno. The Chief Minister of Gujarat vide his letter dated 30.4.2006 replied stating that the matter had been placed before the concerned department for further views. But nothing had been transpired in spite of the fact that crores and crores of rupees were spent by the Government of India for relocation of villages, de-notifying the reserve forest and so on which led to the filing of this public interest litigation seeking a direction to the Respondents to implement the re-location programme as recommended by WII, and approved by the Government of India.
8. The Minister for Tribal Welfare, Forests and Environment, Government of Gujarat vide his D.O. letter dated 18.8.2007 had indicated that it was not possible for the State Government to agree to the proposal for creation of a second home at Kuno in Madhya Pradesh for Asiatic Lions. When the matter came up for consideration before this Court on 30.11.2007 and this Court passed the following order:
There was a proposal for translocation of some of the Asiatic Lions found in the Gir National Park to a forest in Madhya Pradesh. The State of Gujarat has raised certain objections. The State of Madhya Pradesh wants to file its response...... The proposal is directed to be submitted to the National Board for Wildlife. NBWL may consider the objections of State of Gujarat and response of Madhya Pradesh and submit is recommendation in this Court in four months.
9. NBWL then convened a meeting on 18.2.2008 under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister of State for Forests and Wildlife. The Chief Wildlife Warden, Gujarat informed the Board about the various steps taken by the State Government for providing protection to Lions and their habitat and submitted as follows:
a) That Kuno Palpur has a population of 6 to 8 tigers and coexistence of large cats of almost equal size was unlikely.
b) That Lions world over are known to prefer grasslands in sub-topical to near sub-tropical climates with normal temperature during hot period below 42 degree C. (approx) while Kuno is known to have hot climate during summer with temperature exceeding 45 degree C. for a number of days.
c) The prey base at Kuno is also not adequate enough for the lions.
d) Lions are increasing in number and geographical distribution in vicinity of Gir in Amreli & Bhavnagar districts. This is a natural increase in home range of lions, which is well received by local population. Besides, Gir National Park and Gir-Paniya-Mithiyal Sanctuary and Devalia Interpretation Park, lions have made home in Girnar, grasslands of Savarkundla, Palitana and Mahuva hills and in the coastal region of Jafrabad and Rajula in Amreli districts, Mahuva and Palitana talukas of Bhavnagar district.
e) The Barda Sanctuary area is being effectively prepared as home for lion with vegetation having improved while spotted deer are introduced.
f) The natural expansion of home range being the effective way of establishing natural Meta population that infrequently interact among populations located at different places in Gir region. Thus effectively isolated populations which may still received genetic inputs from the base populations are establishing, providing efficient method of conservation.
g) During the year 2007-2008, Government of Gujarat has launched a special programme for conservation of lion with the Hon'ble Chief Minister of Gujarat announcing a five year action plan package of Rs. 40 crore for lion conservation which includes increase in protection force, habitat management, raising awareness to enlist people's participation etc.
10. The Chairman, NBWL then sought the opinion of the Government of Madhya Pradesh on the points raised by the Chief Wildlife Warden, Gujarat.
11. The Additional PCCF (WL), Government of Madhya Pradesh informed that the Kuno was waiting for the release of lions from Gujarat and that the Madhya Pradesh Government had taken all the necessary measures to make Kuno the ideal second home for the lions. Further, it was pointed out that the State had already relocated 24 villages from the sanctuary for the said purpose. Further, it was pointed out that Kuno was suggested as a second home for lions after due scientific studies conducted by WII and the Kuno had posed no threat to the conservation of lions. Further, it was also pointed out that the prey base was in plenty in Kuno and he requested that the lions be translocated to Kuno at the earliest.
12. Dr. Asad Rehmani, Director, Bombay Natural History Society and member of the Standing Committee pointed out that sporadic presence of tiger in Kuno was in no case detrimental to re-introduction of lions. Dr. Divyabhanusinh Chavda, member of the Standing Committee had also emphasized the fact that there was a need to create a second home for lions. Dr. Chavda cited an example of the death of large number of lions in the Serengeti National Park at Tanzania and other areas in Africa due to epidemics. Dr. Chavda cautioned, it could happen at Gir as well. Rest of the members of the Standing Committee also supported the decision for translocation of lions from Gujarat to Kuno. The Standing Committee of NBWL recorded that it was unanimously recommended for translocation of lions from Gujarat to Kuno.
13. The State of Gujarat filed a detailed affidavit before this Court on 4.4.2009 stating that the State had objected to the translocation of lions and that the decision of the Standing Committee was not unanimous. Further, it was also pointed out that there was no sufficient prey base at Kuno so as to receive lions.
14. This Court, after perusing the affidavit filed by the States of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh as well as MoEF, again passed an order dated 22.4.2009 directing NBWL to have a fresh look on the subject and file a report. It was also ordered that NBWL should hear both the States, if necessary before filing the report. The additional affidavit filed by the State of Gujarat was also placed for consideration before NBWL in its meeting held on 17.7.2009. In that meeting, the Chief Wildlife Warden and the Principal Secretary (Forests) were present on behalf of the State of Gujarat. After detailed discussion, the Standing Committee of NBWL had unanimously decided to have an in-house technical discussion on the subject before taking a final view. The technical discussion was, therefore, held during the 16th meeting of the Standing Committee which was convened on 16.9.2009. In that meeting, the representatives of the Government of Madhya Pradesh (Additional Chief Secretary and Chief Wildlife Warden), Government of Gujarat (Principal Secretary - Forest and Chief Wildlife Warden) along with non-official members of the Standing Committee of National Board of Wildlife were also present during the discussions. The following decisions were taken in the technical discussion held on 16.9.2009:
TECHNICAL DISCUSSION ON THE ISSUE TRANSLOCATION of ASIATIC LION FROM GIR TO KUNO PALPUR
It was followed by discussion on Agenda Item No. 4
Member Secretary apprised the Committee that during the last meeting it was decided to have detailed technical discussion on the issue of translocation of lions to Madhya Pradesh (M.P.) in Kuno Palpur Sanctuary. Chairman observed that the issue is not mere translocation of lions from Gujarat to M.P. but also the long term viability of survival of the translocated lions. He also pointed out that in past lions have been translocated in M.P. as well as in U.P. unsuccessfully. Further, at present tiger conservation in M.P. also requires focused efforts on the part of the State Government. Under these circumstances any decision for translocation of lions needs to be taken very carefully after judicious consultations.
Dr. Divyabhanusinh Chavda informed that in the previous instances of lion's translocation in both the cases, lions were hunted because they became cattle lifters and caused acute lion-man conflict in the introduced areas as the introduced areas were small and devoid of adequate prey based. However, this is not the present case. At present hunting is legally banned and proposed introduction area is not only having enough prey base but also devoid of human population. CWLW, M.P. also informed that Kuno Palpur Sanctuary could accommodate even 60 lions as there was about 900 sq. Km of buffer area around the Sanctuary. There was enough prey base as per the survey of the State Forest Department. The additional Chief Secretary, Govt. of M.P. submitted that the issue was not between the two States but was survival of lions and it needs to be provided an alternative home outside 8 the Gujarat State. More than Rs. 34.00 crores have already been spent on the project. In case wild lions are not available, zoo bred lions could be introduced in the identified area following soft release as has been proposed in past. Dr. M.K. Ranjitsinh was of the opinion that introduction of zoo bred or captive bred lions in the wild were not correct approach. The only solution was to introduce wild population of lions. Dr. Asad Rahmani also supported these views of Dr Ranjitsinh.
While elaborating the issue of introduction of captive bred lions, Director, WII informed that introduction of such animals in wild is a long drawn process involving 6-12 years. Only filial-2 or filial-3 of the captive bred population could be introduced in wild through soft release and it would require strict monitoring with scientific inputs at all levels supported with strong political, administrative and financial commitments. Member Secretary pointed out that Hon'ble Supreme Court has referred this issue to the Standing Committee with particular reference to additional affidavit filed by Gujarat State Government. Chairman desired that Ministry could prepare a draft response in the matter and get it circulated amongst the members of the Standing Committee and after incorporating their views, a decision on the response to be filed before the Hon'ble Court would be taken. It was also desired that this draft should be circulated within one month among all the members. Chairman also observed that ministry may restart the earlier approved programme of soft release of captive bred lions in Kunopalpur.
15. The Standing Committee of NBWL then met on 22.12.2009, perused the report of the Technical Committee and made the following observations:
It is submitted that in view of the above background, the following are the observation of the Standing Committee of National Board for Wildlife on the issue of translocation of lion from Gujarat to Madhya Pradesh:
3.1 The population of Asiatic Lions in India has been restricted to its habitat in the Gir National Park and Gir Sanctuary alone, where they face threats due to man-animal conflict, outbreak of possible epidemic or any natural calamity, etc. Such actions may wipe out the whole population. The need for a second home for the Asiatic Lions was therefore felt and accordingly, based on habitat feasibility studies by the Wildlife Institute of India in various Protected Areas and forests of Gujarat, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, three different sites were finally studied in greater detail out of which Kuno Palpur sanctuary in Morena District of Madhya Pradesh was found most suitable for re-introduction and establishing a second free ranging population of Asiatic Lion outside Gir.
3.2 The contention of the Government of Gujarat that the Lions would not be able to survive in Kuno Palpur due to its extreme climatic conditions is not true. It may be mentioned here that the lions have thrived in extreme climate from the deserts of Palestine and Arabia to the cold coniferous forest in Iran in historical times. They were destroyed not by climate, but by the human action. Lions exist and survive in a variety of habitats with varied prey densities, temperatures and vegetation communities across their range, and while the overall prey densities of Gir are in the higher range of lion densities while that of Kuno are in the medium to low density areas of lions, the natural prey densities in Kuno are significantly higher than the natural prey densities in areas in south Saurashtra outside the Gir where Lions have now taken residence and where the State Government wishes to retain them. It was for these "outlying" Lion populations outside of the Gir that translocation to Kuno Palpur was planned. Therefore, it would be unreasonable to compare Kuno prey densities with that of Gir and then come to a conclusion that Kuno is unsuitable habitat for lions. It is well within the lion range of habitats and prey densities currently.
3.3 The Government of Gujarat, vide para 11 of the additional affidavit, had stated that the wildlife Institute of India has used simple logistic model for projections and predictions, while presenting population growth of wild ungulates. This contention of the Government of Gujarat is not appropriate. In fact, models are abstractions of reality - Simplistic Models have general applications and fewer assumptions. Complex models represent specific ecosystems more realistically but are extremely data intensive. Data needed for models like the one suggested by the Government of Gujarat is not available for most populations in India and therefore remain there academic exercises. Model outcomes/recommendations should not be followed blindly. In any case, an evaluation of prey densities should be done again prior to the proposed reintroduction of lions and the reintroduction schedule/plan appropriately modified to be in tune with the realized rate of increase by prey populations of Kuno. It is part of the original plan and in any case, as noted above, the natural prey densities in Kuno are higher than in areas where Lions have taken residence outside of Gir in Gujarat and where they live mainly by preying on livestock.
3.4 The Gir lions have passed through two bottle necks on about 1 to 4 thousand years ago and another about 150-200 years ago and are therefore highly inbred. The reintroduction effort does not end with the introduction of a pride of lions into Kuno. A continued program of exchange/supplementation of individual lions between Gir and Kuno is needed at the rate of 2-3 lions per generation. This supplementation needs to continue till the Kuno lion population Gene pool nears that of Gir lions. It is envisaged that such exchanges to last for a minimum duration of 25-30 years but would benefit from continued exchanges over a longer time scale. The Kuno and Gir populations could be managed as a meta-population that would provide demographic as well as genetic benefits to the Gir lion population as well.
3.5 The contention of Government of Gujarat that translocation of Lions made in earlier occasion during early 20th century and during 1956, especially to the Chandraprabha Wildlife Sanctuary in Uttar Pradesh was unsuccessful and therefore the present translocation also would not yield much results is not correct. The reason being that in the previous instances of Lion's translocation, lions were hunted because they became cattle lifters and caused acute lion-man conflict in the introduced areas as the introduced areas were small and devoid of adequate prey base and burdened with human population. However, this is not the present case. At present hunting is legally banned and proposed introduction area is not only having enough prey base but also devoid of human population. Further there are better scientific inputs, full commitment on the part of State Government of Madhya Pradesh and required home work has been done. Therefore, present relocation is not comparable with earlier efforts.
3.6 The issue of poaching is vital. The Government of Gujarat has dealt with it quite well. Poaching will continue to be a threat as long as there is a demand for lion-tiger parts. In the Kuno area also the management have to be much more vigilant with regard to poaching. Further, there is also a need for a collective action by the Central Government, State Governments along with a strong political and bureaucratic commitment as well as full and dedicated support of technocrats and scientists for better and long term conservation of such a species of national pride and what was once India's National Animal.
3.7 The objective of the Government of India is to conserve Asiatic lions for posterity and this effort does not end by mere introduction of a lion pride to Kuno. It would be imperative that Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh work together in designing a Meta-population management plan based on genetic and demographic data of the Asiatic lions to ensure that this objective is met. Without this cooperative approach, lion conservation objective of the Nation/World will not be met.
In view of the aforesaid, it is recommended that the translocation of lions from Gir area to an alternate area, presently to the Kuno-Palpur Sanctuary, is the necessity of the hour essential for conservation of lions for posterity. As mentioned above, the efforts for conservation of lions would not stop by mere translocation efforts, but it would continue through the active involvement of all the stakeholders.
16. The Standing Committee then authorized the MoEF to file an affidavit to that effect before this Court. Accordingly, an affidavit was filed before this Court by MoEF on 7.1.2010. State of Gujarat also filed a detailed affidavit on 12.11.2010. In its affidavit, the State of Gujarat highlighted the insufficiency of prey base at Kuno and the presence of tigers in the occupied area at Kuno as the major limiting factors. Further, it was also pointed out that the current Asiatic lion population is not a single population confined to one place but consists of meta-population spread over several locations within the Greater Gir Region and that good conservation practices and intensive wild life health care, has lead to epidemic free regime over generations of wildlife including Asiatic Lion in the area.
17. The State of Gujarat took up the stand that, though the issue was discussed by the Standing Committee of NBWL, it had not been placed before the State Board for Wildlife (Gujarat), which is a statutory requirement under the Wild Life (Protection) Act. This Court, therefore, on 27.2.2012, directed the State Board to consider the issue of lions' translocation and to submit its report. Accordingly, the matter was placed before the State Board. The State Board took the view that there was no threat to Asiatic Lion in the Gir forest from epidemic diseases or other such factors. It was pointed out that the present Asiatic lion population has risen achieved. Further, it was pointed out that previous attempts for translocation from Gujarat were also a failure and since the Greater Gir region being an ideal preservation and conservation for Asiatic lions, there is no necessity of finding out a second home for Asiatic lion at Kuno.
ARGUMENTS:
18. We heard Shri Raj Panjwani, learned senior counsel appearing for the applicant, who submitted that this 20-year project is hanging on fire due to the indifferent attitude of the Gujarat Government. Learned senior counsel submitted that the necessity of re-introduction of Asiatic lion at Kuno has been keenly felt and the scientific world has unanimously advocated for translocation of this endangered species to Kuno for its long term survival and preservation. Learned senior counsel pointed out that NBWL, the expert technical body at more than one occasions has approved and granted technical sanction to go ahead with the project, but could not pick up expected momentum due to the indifferent and defiant attitude of the State of Gujarat.
19. Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned Counsel appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh, highlighted the steps taken by the State of Madhya Pradesh for pushing the project forward. Learned Counsel referred to the various counter affidavits filed by the State of Madhya Pradesh for completing the first phase of the project. Necessary sanction has already been obtained to declare Kuno as Sanctuary under the Wildlife Protection Act. MoEF has already granted its approval under Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act for diversion of 3395.9 hectare of forest land for the rehabilitation of eighteen villages located inside Kuno, subject to fulfillment of certain conditions. The area at Kuno was increased to 1268.861 Sq. Km in April 2002 by creating a separate Kuno Wildlife Division. For the above purpose, a total amount of Rs. 1545 lakh had been granted by the Government of India and utilized by the State Government. Learned Counsel also pointed out that altogether 24 villages and 1543 families were relocated outside Kuno by the year 2002-2003 and the lands abandoned by them have been developed into grass lands.
20. Learned Counsel also pointed out that prey density at Kuno the Prey Density Survey conducted during 2004-2005 by Mr. Fiaz A. Khudsar and Mr. Raman in the year 2008. Firstly, it was pointed out that WII had also conducted an independent study in the year 2012, which also supported the stand taken by the State of Madhya Pradesh that there is sufficient prey base to receive sufficient numbers of lions. Over and above, adequate training has also been given to the forest staff, guards etc. for receiving the lions and for their upkeep and monitoring.
21. Shri P.K. Malhotra, learned Additional Solicitor General, submitted that the population of Asiatic lion is increasing at Gir, but there are conceivable threats to their survival; man-made, natural calamity as well as outbreak of epidemic, which may wipe out the entire population, due to their small population base and limited geographical area of spread. It is under such circumstances, the need for a second home for lions was felt, for which Kuno was found to be the most suitable habitat. However, it was pointed out that the lions could be translocated only if sufficient number of ungulates is available and after taking effective measures, such as, control of poaching, grassland management, water management, building rubble wall around the division etc. Learned senior counsel made reference to the study conducted by the experts of WII and Wildlife Trust of India of the programme of re-introduction of Cheetah in Kuno, on import from Namibia. Referring to the correspondence between the Ministry of State (External Affairs) and Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh, it was pointed out that subsequent re-introduction of lions is in no way expected to affect the cheetah population, which would have established in the area, by that time.
22. Shri P.S. Narasimha, learned senior counsel and learned Amicus Curiae apprised the court of the extreme urgency for the protection of the Asiatic lion which has been included in the Red List published by the International Union for Conservation of Natgure (IUCN) as critically endangered species, endorsed by NBWL in various meetings. NBWL, being the highest scientific statutory body, it commands respect and its opinion is worthy of acceptance by the MoEF and all the State Governments. Learned senior counsel also referred to Article 48 and Article 51-A of the Constitution of India and submitted that the State has a duty to protect and improve environment and safeguard the forests and wildlife in the country, a duty cast upon all the States in the Union of India. Reference was also made to the conservatism in Bio Diversity and the Eco-centric principle, which have been universally accepted. Learned senior counsel also referred to the National Wildlife Action Plan 2002-2016, and submitted that translocation of Asiatic lions has been treated as a priority project after having found that an alternative home for Asiatic lion is vital for its survival. Learned senior counsel also submitted that the National Forest Policy and the Scheme of 2009 and NWAP (2002-2016) and the plans have legislative force as decided in Lafarge Umiam Mining Private Limited, T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0735/2011 : (2011) 7 SCC 338 case and can be enforced through Courts.
23. Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel appearing for the State of Gujarat, refuted all those contentions and reiterated that there is no necessity of finding out a second home for Asiatic lions, since the population of Asiatic lion has been properly protected in Greater Gir forest and also in few other sanctuaries near Gir Forest. Shri Divan submitted that the population of Asiatic lion has gone up reasonably since broader conservation methods have been adopted by the State of Gujarat and that at present, there is no immediate threat to the Asiatic lions calling for emergency measures, like translocation or reintroduction. Learned senior counsel further pointed out that past experience shows that such translocation of lions ended in failure and possibility of such recurrence cannot be ruled out, since Kuno is not well set to accept or preserve an endangered species like Asiatic lion; which is a success story at Gir.
24. Shri Divan also submitted that, so far, no acceptable translocation plan has been prepared or implemented for a successful translocation of an endangered species like Asiatic lion and the same has been taken note of and commented upon the State Wildlife Board, Gujarat in its meeting held on 16.3.2012. Shri Divan also submitted that the prey-base studies are totally inadequate and not a single study has been conducted or report placed before this Court to show that the benchmark of 480,000 kgs. of wild ungulates biomass has been attained at Kuno. Shri Divan also referred to the note dated 8.7.2012 submitted by Dr. Ravi Chellam and contended that no reliable information was furnished to support the view regarding adequacy of prey base at Kuno. Shri Divan also referred to Section 12 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act and submitted that the translocation should be to 'an alternative suitable habitat". Kuno, according to the learned senior counsel, is not a 'suitable habitat', not only due to inadequacy of prey-base, but also due to factors like presence of tigers, large scale poaching, unfavourable climate condition, lack of expertise, human-animal conflict etc.
25. Learned senior counsel also referred to the issues raised by the Petitioner through this PIL and contended that it would not stand the tests laid in Lafarge case (supra), especially when the State Board of Wild Life has stated cogent reasons why translocation of lions to Kuno, at present, is not advisable, which is fully justified by the objections and independent scientific material. Such decision, according to the learned senior counsel, is not amenable to judicial review and, even otherwise, no grounds are made out for issuing a Writ of Mandamus directing translocation of Asiatic lion from Gir to Kuno.
Legal Framework
26. We will first deal with the constitutional and the legal framework on which we have to examine the various issues which have come up for consideration in this case. The subject "Protection of wild animals and birds" falls under List III, Entry 17B of Seventh Schedule. The Parliament passed The Wild Life (Protection) Act 53 of 1972 to provide for the protection of wild animals and birds with a view to ensuring the ecological and environmental security of the country. The Parliament vide Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 inserted Article 48A w.e.f. 03.01.1977 in Part IV of the Constitution placing responsibility on the State "to endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country." Article 51A was also introduced in Part IVA by the above-mentioned amendment stating that "it shall be the duty of every citizen of India to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures".
27. By Act 23 of 1982, Section 12(bb) was inserted in the Wild Life (Protection) Act w.e.f. 21.05.1982 which authorised the Chief Wild Life Warden to grant a special permit for the purpose of scientific management which would include translocation of any wild animal to an alternative suitable habitat or population management of wild life without killing or poisoning or destroying any wild animals.
28. The Parliament later vide Act 16 of 2003 inserted Section 5A w.e.f. 22.09.2003 authorizing the Central Government to constitute the National Board for Wild Life (in short 'NBWL'). By the same Amendment Act, Section 5C was also introduced eliciting functions of the National Board. Section 5B was also introduced by the aforesaid amendment authorizing the National Board to constitute a Standing Committee for the purpose of exercising such powers and performing such duties as may be delegated to the Committee by the National Board. NBWL is, therefore, the top most scientific body established to frame policies and advise the Central and State Governments on the ways and means of promoting wild life conservation and to review the progress in the field of wild life conservation in the country and suggesting measures for improvement thereto. The Central and the State Governments cannot brush aside its opinion without any cogent or acceptable reasons. Legislation in its wisdom has conferred a duty on NBWL to provide conservation and development of wild life and forests.
29. This Court in Sansar Chand v. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0869/2010 : (2010) 10 SCC 604 held that all efforts must be made to implement the spirit and provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972; the provisions of which are salutary and are necessary to be implemented to maintain ecological chain and balance. The Stockholm Declaration, the Declaration of United Nations, Conventions on Human Environment signed in the year 1972, to which India is the signatory, have laid down the foundation of sustainable development and urged the nations to work together for the protection of the environment. Conventions on Biological Diversity, signed in the year 1962 at Rio Summit, recognized for the first time in International Law that the conservation of biological diversity is "a common concern of human kind" and is an integral part of the development process.