MANU/SC/7706/2007
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 2530 of 2007 (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 5318 of 2007) and Civil Appeal No. 2531 of 2007 (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 5695 of 2007)
Decided On: 15.05.2007
Appellants: Chairman, Indore Vikas Pradhikaran
Vs.
Respondent: Pure Industrial Cock and Chem. Ltd. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and Markandey Katju, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: K.K. Venugopal and S.K. Gambhir, Sr. Advs., Sanjay Kapur, Shubra Kapur, Rajiv Kapur and Arti Singh, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: C. Aryama Sundaram, Arun Jaitley and Ravindra Shrivastava, Sr. Advs., Nidhesh Gupta, Rohini Musa, Saboo and Binu Tamta, Advs.
Subject: Property
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(f), Constitution Of India - Article 300A; Income Tax Act, 1961 - Section 251(1), Income Tax Act, 1961 - Section 255(5); Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 3, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 5A
Cases Referred:
T. Vijayalakshmi v. Town Planning Member MANU/SC/8559/2006; Prakash Amichand Shah v. State of Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0292/1985; State of Gujarat v. Shantilal Mangaldas and Ors. MANU/SC/0063/1969; Balram Kumwat v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0628/2003; Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samiti and Ors. v. Pilibhit Pantnagar Beej Ltd. and Anr. MANU/SC/0989/2003; Union of India and Ors. v. West Coast Paper Mills Ltd. and Anr. MANU/SC/0098/2004; Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v. Daius Shapur Chenai and Ors. MANU/SC/0610/2005; State of M.P. v. Vishnu Prasad Sharma; Khub Chand v. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0015/1966; CCE v. Orient Fabrics (P) Ltd.; State of Rajasthan and Ors. v. Basant Nahata MANU/SC/0547/2005; State of Uttar Pradesh v. Manohar MANU/SC/1058/2004; Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar and Ors. v. State of Gujarat and Anr. MANU/SC/0033/1995; Sri Krishnapur Mutt, Udupi v. N. Vijayendra Shetty and Anr. 1992 (3) Kar.L.J. 326; Pt. Chet Ram Vashist (Dead) by LRs. v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi MANU/SC/0563/1995; Raju S. Jethmalani v. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0362/2005; Lenhon v. Gobson & Howes Ltd. (1919) AC 709; Venkata Subamma and Anr. v. Ramayya and Ors. MANU/PR/0003/1932; State of H.P. and Ors. v. Rajkumar Brijender Singh and Ors. MANU/SC/0509/2004; Bombay Dyeing and Mfg. Co. Ltd. v. Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors. MANU/SC/1197/2006; National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Laxmi Narain Dhut MANU/SC/1233/2007; Maruti Udyog Ltd. v. Ram Lal and Ors. MANU/SC/0056/2005; Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0073/1987; High Court of Gujarat v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat MANU/SC/0214/2003 : (2003) 4 SCC 712; Indian Handicrafts Emporium and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0640/2003; Deepal Girishbhai Soni and Ors. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd., Baroda MANU/SC/0246/2004; State of Orissa and Ors. v. Commissioner of Land Records and Settlement, Cuttack and Ors. MANU/SC/0549/1998; Roop Chand v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0332/1962; Ajay Gandhi v. B. Singh; S.B. Bhattacharjee v. S.D. Majumdar and Ors. Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 3413 of 2006; Rakesh Vij v. Dr. Raminder Pal Singh Sethi and Ors. MANU/SC/0840/2005; Director of Public Works v. Ho Po Sang 1961 AC 901 : (1961) 2 All ER 721; Lakshmi Amma v. Devassy 1970 KLT 204; Howrah Municipal Corporation v. Ganges Rope Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/1073/2003; Union of India v. Indian Charge Chrome MANU/SC/0524/1999; S.B. International Ltd. v. Asstt. Director General of Foreign Trade MANU/SC/1079/1996; Kuldeep Singh v. Govt. NCT of Delhi MANU/SC/8215/2006
Authorities Referred:
Craies on Statute Law, Seventh Edition, p. 141; G.P. Singh's Principles of Statutory Interpretation, Tenth edition, p. 278; Francis Bennion's Statutory Interpretation; 'The Interpretation and Application of Statutes' by Reed Dickerson
Prior History:
From the Final Judgment and Order dated 06.03.2007 of the High Court of Judicature at Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur in Writ Appeal No. 462 of 2006
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Dissented
  17

Mentioned
  20

Case Note:
Civil - Jurisdiction - Exercise of power by delegate - State Government issued notification constituting Indore Planning Area which constituted 37 villages - State Government delegated its power in favour of District Planning Committee (DPC) - DPC in exercise of power amended the planning area by adding 115 villages and subsequently deleting 62 villages - Respondent's land fell within area covered under notification - Respondent filed application for sanction for grant of development plan - Application dismissed in view of notification of State Government - Respondent filed writ seeking writ of mandamus directing the authority to sanction the site plan which had been submitted - Petition allowed by High Court - Hence, present appeal - Whether with regard to notification issued by Indore Development Plan the district committee in exercise of delegated power can automatically extend the area of operation of the appellant despite the notification constituting the area by the State - A delegate must exercise its jurisdiction within four corners of its delegation - When the villages had not been included within the area of operation of appellant authority any action taken either by way of its intention to frame a town planning scheme or otherwise shall be wholly illegal and without jurisdiction - Order of High Court upheld - Appeal dismissed.
Ratio Decidendi:
Jurisdiction - A delegatee must exercise it jurisdiction within four corners of its delegation.
Industry: Chemicals
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. Interpretation of the provisions of Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam, (No. 23 of 1973) (for short, 'the Act') is in question in these appeals which arise out of the judgments and orders dated 06.03.2007 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Writ Petition No. 9396 of 2006 and Writ Appeal No. 462 of 2006.
3. Before we advert to the said question, we may notice the admitted fact of the matter.
4. The said Act was enacted to make provisions for planning and development and use of land; to make better provision of the preparation of the development plans and zoning plans with a view to ensuring that town planning schemes are made in a proper manner and their execution is made effective; to constitute a Town & Country Planning Authority for proper implementation of town and country development plan; to provide for the development and administration of special areas through a Special Area Development Authority; to make provision for the compulsory acquisition of land required for the purposes connected with the said matters. The said Act came into force with effect from 16.04.1973.
Statutory Provisions:
5. The terms "development", "existing land use map", "planning area", "Town Development Scheme" and "Town and Country Development Authority", which are relevant for the purpose of this case, have been defined in Section 2(f), 2(i), 2(o), 2(u) and 2(v) of the Act respectively in the following terms:
2(f) "development" with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of a building, engineering, mining or other operation in, on over or under land, or the making of any material change in any building or land or in the use of either, and includes sub-division of any land;
2(i) "existing land use map" means a map indicating the use to which lands in any specified area are put at the time of preparing the map, and includes the register prepared, with the map giving details of land-use.
2(o) "planning area" means any area declared to be a planning area under this Act: Non-Planning area shall be construed accordingly.
2(u) "Town Development Scheme" means a scheme prepared for the implementation of the provisions of a development plan by the Town and Country Development Authority and includes "Scheme"
2(v) "Town and Country Development Authority" means an authority established under Section 38.
6. Chapter IV of the Act deals with planning areas and development plans. Section 13(1) empowers the State Government to constitute planning areas for the purposes of the said Act and define the limits thereof. Sub-section (2) of Section 13 empowers the State Government by notification, inter alia, to alter the limits of the planning area so as to include therein or exclude therefrom such areas, as may be specified in the notification; to amalgamate two or more planning areas so as to constitute one planning area; to divide any planning area into two more planning areas; and to declare that the whole or part of the area constituting the planning area shall cease to be a planning area or part thereof. Sub-section (3) of Section 13 of the Act provides for a non-obstante clause, in terms whereof, the local authority mentioned therein shall in relation to the planning areas from the date of the notification issued under Sub-section (1) cease to exercise the powers, perform the functions and discharge the duties which the State Government or the Director is competent to exercise. Section 14 of the Act enables the Director to prepare an existing land use map and development plan. Section 15 enables the Director to carry out the survey and prepare an existing land use map and forthwith publish the same in the manner laid down therein. Once such a plan is published, no person is authorised to institute or change the use of any land or carry out any development of land for any purpose other than that indicated in the existing land use map without the permission in writing of the Director.
7. Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) of Section 16, however, provides:
(b) no local authority or any officer or other authority shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, grant permission for the change in use of land otherwise than as indicated in the existing land use map without the permission in writing of the Director.
8. Section 17 provides as to what should be the contents of the development plan. Section 17A(1) provides for constitution of a committee; Sub-sections (2) and (3) whereof read as under:
(2) The Committee constituted under Sub-section (1), shall:
(a) consider and suggest modifications and alterations in the draft development plan prepared by the Director under Section 14;
(b) hear the objections after the publication of the draft development plan under Section 18 and suggest modifications or alterations if any; to the Director.
(3) The Convenor of the Committee shall record in writing all the suggestions, modifications and alterations recommended by the committee under Sub-section (2) and thereafter forward his report to the Director.
9. Section 18 of the Act provides for publication of a development plan; in terms whereof the objections and suggestions in writing are invited with respect thereto. The notice in terms of the said provision is to specify in regard to the draft development plan, inter alia, the following particulars:
(i) the existing land use maps;
x x x
(iv) the provisions for enforcing the draft development plan and stating the manner in which permission for development may be obtained.
10. Section 19 provides for sanction of development plans, Sub-section (2) whereof reads as under:
(2) Where the State Government approves the development plan with modification the State Government shall, by a notice published in the Gazette, invite objections and suggestions in respect of such modifications within a period of not less than thirty days from the date of publication of the notice in the Gazette.
11. Preparation of zoning plan is envisaged under Chapter V thereof. Section 20 reads as under:
20. The Local Authority may on its own motion at any time after the publication of the development plan, or thereafter if so required by the State Government shall, within six months of such requisition, prepare a zoning plan.
12. In the zoning plan more details of land use as indicated in the development plan are to be indicated and, inter alia, shall:
(c) allocate in detail areas or zones for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, and other purposes;
13. Chapter VI of the Act deals with control of development and use of land, provided that the overall control of development and use of land in the State shall vest in the State Government; Sub-section (2) of Section 24 reads as under:
(2) Subject to the provision of Sub-section (1) and the rules made under this Act, the overall control of development and use of land in the planning area shall vest in the Director with effect from such date as the State Government may by notification, appoint in this behalf.
14. Section 25 envisages that the use and development of land shall conform to the provisions of the development plan. Section 38 occurring in Chapter VII provides for establishment of a Town and Country Development Authority, Sub-sections (1) and (2) whereof read as under:
38(1).-The State Government may, by notification, establish a Town and Country Development Authority by such name and for such area as may be specified in the notification.
(2) The duty of implementing the proposal in the development plan, preparing one or more town development schemes and acquisition and development of land for the purpose of expansion or improvement of the area specified in the notification under Sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions of this Act vest in the Town & Country Development Authority established for the said area.
15. Section 49 of the Act envisages that a town development scheme may make provision for the matters specified therein including acquisition of land for the purposes mentioned therein as also any other work of such a nature as would bring about environmental improvements which may be taken up by the authority with the prior approval of the State Government.
16. Sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) of Section 50 of the Act, which are material for our purpose, read as under:
50.(1) The Town and Country Development Authority may, at any time, declare its intention to prepare a town development scheme.
(2) Not later than thirty days from the date of such declaration of intention to make a scheme, the Town and Country Development Authority shall publish the declaration in the Gazette and in such other manner as may be prescribed.
(3) Not later than two years from the date of publication of the declaration under Sub-section (2) the Town and Country Development Authority shall prepare a town development scheme in draft form and publish it in such form and manner as may be prescribed together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions from any person with respect to the said draft development scheme before such date as may be specified therein, such date being not earlier than thirty days from the date of publication of such notice.
(4) The Town and Country Development Authority shall consider all the objections and suggestions as may be received within the period specified in the notice under Sub-section (3) and shall after giving a reasonable opportunity to such persons affected thereby as are desirous of being heard or after considering the report of the committee constituted under Sub-section (5) approve the draft scheme as published or make such modifications therein as it may deem fit.
17. A proviso has been added thereafter to Sub-section (4) by Act of 2004 in terms whereof a draft scheme must be approved within the period of one year from the publication thereof. Section 51 provides for revision of the draft scheme. Section 53 imposes restrictions on land use and land development in the following terms:
53. As from the date of publication of the declaration to prepare a town development scheme, no person shall, within the area included in the scheme, institute or change the use of any land or building or carry out any development, save in accordance with the development authorised by the Director in accordance with the provisions of this Act prior to the publication of such declaration.
18. Section 55 provides that land needed for the purpose of town development scheme shall be deemed to be land needed for public purpose. Section 72 empowers the State Government to supervise and control the acts and proceedings of the officers appointed under Section 3 and the authorities constituted under the said Act. The State can issue directions in terms of Section 73 of the Act. Section 75 Section provides for delegation of powers.
Notifications:
19. On or about 13.02.1974, the State Government issued a notification under Sub-section (1) of Section 13 of the Act constituting Indore Planning Area, the limits whereof were defined in the schedule appended thereto. Indisputably, it constituted only 37 villages. The villages Bicholi and Kanadia, with which we are concerned herein, were not included therein.
20. The State Government in exercise of power conferred upon it under Section 38 of the Act issued a notification establishing the Appellant- Authority, namely, 'Indore Vikas Pradhikaran' from 13.05.1977 in respect of the area specified in the notification dated 13.02.1974.
21. On or about 30.03.1999, the State Government delegated its power under Sections 13 and 47A of the Act in favour of the District Planning Committee and it in exercise of said delegated power by a notification dated 13.11.2000 amended the planning area by adding 115 villages therein which included the said villages Bicholi and Kanadia. By a notification dated 28.06.2002, it, however, further amended the extent of planning area by deleting 62 villages therefrom. Bicholi and Kanadia villages were, however, retained in the said amended notification.
22. Upon compliance of the usual statutory formalities, the appellant published a draft development plan on 27.06.2003. The said plan was in respect of Urban Development Scheme No. 164. Objections and suggestions in respect thereof were called for. Allegedly, objections and suggestions having been filed; they were heard by the Development Planning Committee during the period between 25.08.2003 and 03.09.2003. By a resolution adopted in a meeting held on 20.08.2004 a decision in anticipation of approval of the Government under Section 50(1) of the Act was proposed, which included the lands of villages Bicholi and Kanadia, inter alia, for construction of a bye-pass road of 60 metres width. A declaration of intention to prepare a town development scheme in terms of Sub-section (2) of Section 50 was issued on 24.08.2004. Indisputably, in terms of Sub-section (3) of Section 50 of the Act, the draft town development scheme was to be prepared within a period of two years therefrom. On or about 02.12.2004, Respondent applied for sanction of development plans under Section 29(1) of the Act. We may, however, notice that on 04.01.2005, the said draft development plans were returned by the State of Madhya Pradesh in terms of Section 19(1) of the Act with a direction that the plans be prepared for the projected population as in the year 2021 and the same be placed before the Government for approval as soon as possible.
23. The State of Madhya Pradesh, however, issued a notification in terms of Sub-section (1) of Section 38 of the Act, inter alia, in respect of the villages in question, namely, Bicholi and Kanadia only on 28.10.2005. Appellant issued a notification on 18.05.2006 inviting objections in respect of the said scheme. A Draft Development Plan-2021 was published on 13.07.2006.
Contentions of the writ petitioner-respondents:
24. Respondents' lands situated in villages Bicholi and Kanadia were within the respective jurisdictions of the Gram Panchayats constituted under the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Gram Panchayat Act. The said panchayats in terms of the provisions of the Act were 'local authorities'. They submitted applications for grant of building plan in the year 1990 and the same was sanctioned on or about 05.04.1991.
25. Respondents, as noticed hereinbefore, applied for and obtained sanction in terms of the building bye-laws framed by the respective gram panchayats in 1991 for grant of development plans under Section 29(1) on 02.12.2004. The said applications were rejected by the Joint Director, Town and Country Planning in view of the purported publication of the plan under Sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Act. Respondents filed a writ petition against the said order, inter alia, praying for issuance of a writ or order in the nature of mandamus directing the said authority to sanction the site plan which had been submitted. The said writ petitions were dismissed by a learned Single Judge by an order dated 17.05.2006. Writ appeals were preferred there against, which have been allowed by the Division Bench of the High Court by its judgment dated 06.03.2007.
High Court Judgment:
26. By reason of the impugned judgment, the High Court struck down the declaration made under Section (2) of Section 50 of the Act, opining:
(i) Unless a development plan for an area is published and comes into operation, a draft development scheme cannot be published by the Town and Country Development Authority under Sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Act.
(ii) Such a town development scheme cannot by itself without a development plan for the area restrict the right of a person to use his property in the manner he likes.
(iii) Although the notification issued by the Appellant-Authority had been constituted by the State Government only in respect of the area which was covered by the notification dated 13.02.1974, the draft development scheme prepared by it was ultra vires, so far as the said two villages are concerned, being beyond its territorial jurisdiction.
Submissions:
27. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, and Mr. S.K. Gambhir, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, submitted:
(i) The High Court committed a serious error in interpreting the provisions of Section 50 of the Act, inasmuch : (i) Under the Act an existing land use map has to be published which would indicate broadly the land use proposed in the planning area and the areas or zones of land allocated for the purposes mentioned therein; and (ii) As the scheme covers the villages in question, the same could not have been ignored.
(ii) Having regard to the fact that the scheme provides for construction of a bypass road of 70 feet width, any construction by the builders would lead to haphazard development and, thus, would completely destroy the purpose for which the land was to be reserved for planned development of the residential area.
(iii) Undertaking of haphazard and unplanned development would carry with it a statutory injunction provided for under Section 53 of the Act, in terms whereof, if an existing land use map or a draft development plan or a town development scheme is published, no person is permitted to obtain any permission for carrying out any development contrary thereto or inconsistent therewith.
(iv) The materials on records established that a large number of permissions were obtained by the private developers which if allowed to be implemented shall result in haphazard development of colonies and buildings and, thus, defeat the purpose of the Act.
(v) As Section 50 is not subject to the publication of a final development plan, as would be evident from the words used therein, namely, 'at any time', Section 53 would operate as soon as an intention is expressed by issuance of a notification in terms thereof.
(vi) Section 50 of the Act must be read in the contrast with Section 20 thereof. So read, a town development scheme must be consistent with the provisions of the existing land use map as well as a draft development plan; as otherwise the purport and object for which Section 53 has been enacted would become otiose.
(vii) The Authority constituted under Section 38 being statutorily obligated to implement the development plan, as would appear from Sections 38(2) and 49 of the Act, the power/duty to prevent haphazard by declaring the town development scheme must be held to be vested in the Appellant-Authority.
(viii) The State of Madhya Pradesh having framed rules known as 'Madhya Pradesh Bhumi Vikas Niyam, 1984', (Rules) which are parts of the town development scheme, keeping in view the fact that the scheme provided for 10,000 houses for the low income group wherefore three major roads were required to be built up having a width of 75 metres, 60 metres and 36 metres respectively as also parks, roads, colleges, gardens, playgrounds and green belts, the purposes for which such scheme had been framed would not be subserved, if permissions are granted for haphazard and unplanned development.
(ix) In any event, private interest must be waived to public interest.
(x) The High Court committed a manifest error insofar it failed to take into consideration that the planning area having been extended by a notification issued by the District Planning Committee, the same would subserve the purpose of the notification dated 28.10.2005 issued under Sub-section (1) of Section 38 of the Act.
28. Mr. Banthia, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State had not made any separate submission before us.
29. Mr. C.A. Sundaram and Mr. Arun Jaitley, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents in these appeals, on the other hand, would submit:
(i) The land of the respondents being outside the planning area, as notified by the State of Madhya Pradesh constituting the Appellant- Authority, the purported town development scheme would not be applicable in relation thereto. Only because the planning area has been extended by the District Planning Committee, the same would not ipso fact enlarge the territorial jurisdiction of the Appellant-Authority.
(ii) Safeguard of public interest has sufficiently been taken care of in terms of the Act., as upon issuance of a notification under Section 13 of the Act, the Director only is authorised to sanction a plan for development and carry out other functions as laid down under Sections 15, 16 and 17 of the Act.
(iii) The committee constituted under Section 17-A of the Act is the only authority which can consider and suggest modifications in the draft development plan prepared by the Director under Section 14, whereafter only a draft development plan can be published in terms of Section 18; Sub-section (2) whereof in turn envisages consideration of objections, suggestions, etc.
(iv) Only upon completion of the procedures laid down in the said provisions development plan can be sanctioned by the State under Section 19 and, thus, in the event the State Government has power to make modification in the development plan, the same would come into operation only from the date of publication of the notification in the gazette issued under Sub-section (4) thereof.
(v) Procedure laid down in the provisions of the Act having not been fulfilled, the impugned action had resulted in breach of law and, thus, the same had rightly been struck down.
(vi) Chapter V of the Act provides for preparation of zoning plans and the contents thereof having been prescribed, the safeguards envisaged under Sections 18 and 19 of the Act would take care of public interest involved, inasmuch the overall control and development as also land use is vested in the Director and in that view of the matter unless a final development plan comes into being, the Appellant-Authority cannot be held to have any jurisdiction there over in view of Section 38 of the Act.
(vii) The definition of the 'town development scheme' as contained in Section 2(u) of the Act presupposes existence of a sanctioned development plan prepared as per law, and, thus, in absence thereof a town development scheme under Section 50 cannot be made.
(viii) In view of the fact that the State Government has issued a notification on 28.10.2005 extending the area of operation of the Appellant- Authority, the scheme illegally notified by it would not be invalidated.
(ix) Gram Panchayat of the village being the competent authority at the relevant time having sanctioned the building plan, a vested right had accrued in favour of the first respondent and such a power having been acknowledged and accepted under the provisions of the Act, the same cannot be taken away.
Analysis of the statutory provisions:
30. The Act is divided into several chapters. It proceeds on the basis that steps are required to be taken before a town planning scheme is given effect to. The State Government is in overall control of the matter relating to town and country planning.
31. The Director of Town and Country Planning, however, subject to the control and supervision of the State, exercises such statutory powers which are conferred upon him. A State is divided into several regions. A regional plan is finalised whereupon restrictions on use of land or development thereof can be imposed. Such regional plan is subject to review.
32. Chapter IV of the Act provides for carving out planning areas and preparation of development plans. Development plans are required to be prepared and finalised only in relation to the planning areas. An area, however, which is notified can be Sub-divided into planning areas and non- planning areas.
33. Chapter V of the Act deals with the preparation, finalization, review and modifications of the zonal plan wherewith we are not concerned much in these appeals. Chapter VI of the Act provides for control of development and use of land. In terms of Section 24 of the Act, the Director is to control land use. Preparation of development plan, prohibition of development without permission and matters connected therewith and incidental thereto are also dealt with in Chapter VI. Chapter VII of the Act, however, provides for shift of control in respect of land use and development for the hands of the Director and, consequently of the State to the Town and Country Development Authority. Section 38 provides for establishment of Town and Country Development Authority.
34. The Act envisages the following steps which are required to be complied with:
(a) Constitution of a planning area by notification under Section 13.
(b) Compliance of the detailed procedure set out under Sections 14 to 19, leading to sanction of the development plan under Section 19. The said procedure envisages compliance of principles of natural justice.
(c) Section 38 provides for establishment of a Town and Country Development Authority, by notification "for such areas as may be specified in the notification". Under Sub-section (2) thereof, duties of implementation of the development plan and preparation of the town development scheme have been cast on the Town and Country Development Authority.
(d) The town development scheme is to be prepared upon following the procedure set out under Section 50. The said scheme can be prepared only when there exists a development plan, prepared in accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Act as envisaged under Sections 14 to 19 and after notification under Section 38(1). In this regard, reference may be also be made to Section 2(u) of the Act, which describes a town development scheme to mean a scheme prepared for implementation of the provisions of the development plan.