MANU/SC/0804/2003
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 2166 and 2167 of 1998
Decided On: 13.10.2003
Appellants: Chairman and M.D., B.P.L. Ltd.
Vs.
Respondent: S.P. Gururaja and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
V.N. Khare, C.J., Ashok Bhan and S.B. Sinha, JJ.
Counsels:
Mukul Rohatgi, Additional Solicitor General, Dushyant A. Dave and T.L. Vishwanatha Iyer, Sr. Advs., Aditya Narain, Rajan Narain, Vandana Chugh, Puja Sharma, Saurabh Kirpal, Kiran Suri and G.V. Chandrashekar, Advs. for P.P. Singh and Sanjay R. Hegde, Advs. for the appearing parties
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 12, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 162, Constitution Of India - Article 166, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 25, Constitution Of India - Article 26
Cases Referred:
G.B. Mahajan and Ors. v. Jalgaon Municipal Council and Ors., MANU/SC/0284/1991; Tata Cellular v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0002/1996; M.P. Oil Extraction and Anr. v. State of M.P. and Ors., [MANU/SC/1302/1997; Netaj Bag and Ors. v. State of W.B. and Ors., MANU/SC/0604/2000; Raunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R. Construction Ltd. and Ors., MANU/SC/0770/1998; Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/0640/2000; Balco Employees' Union (Read.) v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/0779/2001; Guruvayur Devaswom Managing Committee and Anr. v. C.K. Rajan and Ors., MANU/SC/0582/2003; Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks Mumbai and Ors., MANU/SC/0664/1998; Bromley London Borough Council v. Greater London Council, [1983] 1 AC 768; International Transport Roth GmbH v. Secretary of State for the Horns Department, [2002] EWCA Civ 158, [2002] 3 WLR 344; Adams v. Lord Advocate, Bangalore Medical Trust. v. B.S. Muddappa and Ors., MANU/SC/0426/1991; Pfizer Ltd. v. Mazdoor Congress and Ors., MANU/SC/0660/1996
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 07.02.1998 of the Karnataka High Court in C.W.P. No. 30965 of 1996 (MANU/KA/0182/1998)
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:

Relied On
  10

Case Note:
Civil - Public Interest Litigation - Public Interest Litigations are meant to protect basic human rights of the weak and the disadvantage - In recent times there has been increasing abuses of P.I.L. - Court has to redefine the parameters within which P.I.L. can be resorted to by a petitioner and entertained by the court - Where a segment of public is not interested in the cause, public interest litigation would not ordinarily be entertained - Undue haste is not a ground for exercise of power of judicial review unless it is held to be malifide - Appeal allowed
Industry: Consumer Durables
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. How economic development of a State can be halted by a Public Interest Litigation has received the attention of this Court in some of its decisions. The case at hand adds to the said list.
BACKDROP FACTS:
2. The Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') is a statutory authority, constituted under Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966. It acquired a vast tract of land inter alia for the purpose of allotment thereof to entrepreneurs who intended to set up industries in the State of Karnataka. The State of Karnataka with a view to accelerate economic development of the State adopted a policy decision of dealing with the applications received from the entrepreneurs through one window system. With a view, to achieve the said objective a High Level Committee was constituted. B.P.L. Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the Company') with a view to set up industries applied for allotment of 500 acres of land for its three projects. The said application was considered by the High Level Committee wherein a decision was taken to allot 17-5 acres of land in favour of the Company at Rs. 92/- per sq.m. The Company was held to be entitled to various other incentives for the aforementioned purposes. Such allotment was made by issuing an order dated 7.4.1995 out of the land acquired by it i.e. 296,26 acres in terms of notification dated 2/4th September, 1991 issued under Section 28(1) of the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966.
PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION:
3. The respondents filed a public interest litigation questioning the said allotment inter alia on the ground that the statutory purposes for which the Board can acquire the land had been breached by reason thereof. The respondent Nos. 1 to 3 describing themselves to be the social workers in the writ petition raised the following contentions:
(a) That the Board can acquire the land only for the purposes (three in number as stated in the Act).
(b) That the land to other Entrepreneurs is sold at the rate of Rs. 3,80,000/- per acre whereas it is sold to BPL at Rs. 3,72,324/-per acre.
(c) That the allotment being contrary to Regulations is arbitrary and unreasonable.
(d) That the allotment is made without inviting applications and without notifying the availability of land to general public.
(e) That the exercise of power is mala fide and suffers from legal malice.
4. The contentions of the Board, on the other hand, were;
a) That the respondents have no locus standi to maintain the writ petition as legal rights of the general public have not been infringed."
b) No notice under Order 1 Rule 8 of C.P.C. having been published, the writ petition was not maintainable.
c) That the Government of Karnataka in exercise of its executive powers under Article 162 of the Constitution of India has established a single window Agency to accord, with significant authenticity, sanction/clearance/ approval to the establishment of new Industries of expansion of existing units, which include sanction of infrastructural facilities like land, power, water, finance etc. Wherever an Industrial Project involves an investment beyond fifty crores, the decision to accord sanction/ approval/ clearance shall be taken by High Level Committee.
d) That the High Level Committee constituted under the said Government orders in its meeting held on 10.10.1994 and 24.1.1995 recommended that :
(i) 220 Acres of land be made available immediately to BPL group at Dobospet Industrial Area for implementing colour picture tube and batteries project.
(ii) Additional land acquisition be initiated by the Karnataka Industrial area Development Board on the basis of justification of total land requirement of 500 acres to be furnished by the group.
In its 28th meeting held on 29.3.1995, the Committee took notice of the requirements of the BPL India Ltd. and after thorough discussion resolved that Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB for short) shall handover 175 acres of land at Dobospet Industrial Area to the BPL India Ltd.
e) That thereafter the Government of Karnataka by its order dated 16.5.1995 cleared the three projects of the BPL India Ltd. which involved a total investment of Rs.663.56 crores. The Government of Karnataka decided to allot 220 acres of land at Dobospet Industrial Area.
f) that an extent of 278.42 acres of private land near Dobospet was acquired by the State Government under Section 28 (4) of KIADB Act, 1966 for the purpose of development by this Respondent. The final declaration is published in Karnataka Gazette dated 12.11.1992. A layout was planned in consultation with the Director, Town Planning to form 28 plots of varying extent from 1 acre to 210 acres. Plot No. 1 and 2 measuring 30 acres and 210 acres are reserved in favour of BPL India Ltd. In the remaining 74 acres small plots are formed to accommodate non-polluting Industries. An extent of 28.80 acres will be occupied by roads, civic amenities etc.
g) That this respondent while developing an industrial area undertakes development work like formation of WBM Roads, with block topping, drains with dick also culverts, stream water drains, drains supply through borewell, street lighting, avenue trees and drawing of high tension and low tension power line. The cost incurred has to be borne by allottees. However, the land that is allotted to BPL India Ltd. has not been entirely developed and only peripheral infrastructural facilities would be provided."
5. The Company also filed a counter affidavit alleging that the said allotment was made pursuant to the Board's resolution adopted by the Single Window Agency. The anticipated investment of the Company was Rs. 600 crores. The composition of the Committee was as follows:
1. Additional Chief Secretary to Government of Karnataka Chairman
2. Secretary to Government Commerce & Industries Department Member
3. Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Housing & Urban Development Department Member
4. Secretary to Government , Science & Technology & Ecology & Environment Member
5. Director of Industries & Commerce Member
6. Chairman & Managing Director, Karnataka State Industrial Investment & Development Corporation Limited Member
7. Managing Director. Karnataka State Finance Corporation Member
8. Chairman, Karnataka Electricity Board Member
9. Chairman, Karnataka State Pollution Control Board Member
10. Chief Inspector of Factories & Boilers Member
11 . Excise Commissioner Member
12. Managing Director, Karnataka Urban Water Supply & Drainage Board Member
13. Managing Director, KEONICS Member
14. Executive Member, Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board Member-Secretary
15. General Manager (P&D), Karnataka State Industrial Investment & Development Corporation Limited Member-Secretary
16. Joint Director (Industrial Development) Industries & Commerce Department Member-Secretary
6. The application filed by the Company went through various processes and several meetings of the different committees were held. The High Level Committee also considered the matter in a number of meetings, pursuant whereto and in furtherance whereof the aforementioned decision was taken whereafter the Company deposited 99% of the cost of the allotted land amounting to Rs. 6,45,05,133/- with a view to obtain possession. It was further contended that only possession of 149 acres and 5.5 guntas out of 173 acres had been delivered. A lease-cum-sale agreement in terms of the extant regulations was executed on 2.6.1995.
7. Various suits thereafter were filed by certain interested parties as a result whereof the Company could not start its constructional activities.
8. Ultimately, a lease-cum-sale agreement was executed on 17.4.1996 which came into force with effect from 29.5.1995. The lease was for a period of 11 years and the yearly rent payable therefore was Rs. 55,479/- and maintenance charges at Rs. 74,568/-. It was stipulated that on expiry of the said period of 11 years the property would be sold to the lessee at the price fixed by the lessor.
9. Clause 11(b) of the said Agreement to Lease reads as follows:
"As soon as it may be convenient the LESSOR will fix the price of demised premises at which it will be sold to the LESSEE and communicate it to the LESSEE and the decision of the Lessor in this regard will be final and binding on the LESSEE. The LESSEE shall pay the balance of the value of the property, if any, after adjusting the premium and the total amount of rent paid by the LESSEE and earnest money deposit within one month from the date of receipt of communication signed by the LESSOR or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the LESSOR. On the other hand, if any sum is determined as payable by the LESSOR to the LESSEE after the adjustment as aforesaid, such sum shall be refunded to the LESSEE before the date of execution of the sale deed."
10. The appellants also contended before the High Court that the writ petitioners-respondents had been set up by the persons whose lands had been acquired. They were members of political parties also.
DIRECTIONS BY THE HIGH COURT:
11. The High Court called for the entire records. Upon consideration of the rival pleadings as also the records of the case, the writ petition filed by the respondents herein was allowed directing:
"(a) Quash the allotment of land made by this Petitioner in favour of BPL India Ltd. Only in so far as excess land than the land actually utilised so far by the BPL India at any rate not exceeding 30 acres.
(b) This petitioner is directed to recover possession of remaining land forthwith.
(c) After recovering possession, this petitioner is directed to form industrial plots and allot the same to prospective industrialist after notifying and inviting applications.
(d) In respect of land that is left with the BPL India Ltd., this Petitioner shall work out the cost of such, land at the rate of Rs. 8 lakhs per acre and after adjusting the amount already paid by BPL India, shall refund the balance amount to BPL India together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of receipt of the amount.
(e) In order to ascertain the actual utilization of land by BPL India so far the Assistant Director of Land Record was directed to conduct survey of the land which is actually utilized by the BPL India Ltd. in the presence of Petitioner and the Respondents, prepare a sketch thereof and earmark the boundaries so that the Board can recover possession of rest of the land from the BPL India Ltd.
(f) The cost of Rs. 10,000/- was awarded to writ petitioners to be paid by this Petitioner."
STATUTES OPERATING IN THE FIELD:
12. It is not in dispute that the matter relating to allotment of industrial land is governed by Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'). The appellant-Board has been constituted thereunder. In terms of the said Act, the State Government is empowered to acquire land and to handover the same to the Board for development and allotment to eligible industries. The relevant provisions of the said Act are as under:
"17. Directions by State Government:
The State Government may issue to the Board such directions of a general nature as it may think necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of this Act and the Board shall be, bound to follow and act upon such directions.
41. Power to make Regulations:
(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the State Government, by notification make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made hereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for.-
(a) ......
(b) the terms and conditions under which the Board may dispose of land."
13. Pursuant to and in furtherance of the power conferred upon the State, regulations were framed known as 'Regulations governing the disposal of land by the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board'. Regulations 7 and 13 of the said Regulations which are relevant for the purpose of this case are as under:
"7. Inviting applications:
The Board shall notify the availability of land, the manner of disposal, the last date for submission of applications and such other particulars as the Board may consider necessary in each case by giving wide publicity through newspapers having circulation in and outside Karnataka State and invite applications from industries or persons intending to start industries.
13. Allotment of Plots in Special cases:
Notwithstanding anything contained in these Regulations the Board in consultation with the State Government may allot any plot or area other than those in respect of which applications are called for under Regulations 7 to any individual or company for the establishment, of an industry or for the provision for any amenity required in the Industrial Area."
SUBMISSIONS:
14. Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, the learned Addl. Solicitor General and Mr. D.A. Dave, the learned senior counsel, appearing for the appellants would submit that the High Court committed a manifest error in passing the impugned judgment insofar as it entered into the question of validity or otherwise of the policy decision adopted by the State. The learned counsel would submit that the requirements of the Company for setting up its industrial units can be judged by the experts where for High Level Committee was constituted and, thus the High Court could not sit in appeal there over, It was urged that the High Court further committed a manifest error by arriving at the conclusion that the State had shown undue haste in the matter of grant of allotment and that too at a price of Rs. 3,72,324/- per acre although it received the consideration of Rs. 8,00,000/- per acre from another entrepreneur.
15. The learned counsel would further urge that the High Court has failed to consider that the writ petitioners had no locus standi to file the writ application as they had been set up by those whose lands had been acquired. It was pointed out that whereas the lands were allotted on 7.4.1995, the writ petition having been filed on 11.11.1996 suffered from gross delay and laches and in that view of the matter too the High Court should have refused to exercise its jurisdiction in favour of the appellants particularly in view of the fact that the Company in the meantime have changed their position by investing about Rs. 80/- crores.
16. Mr. T.L.V. Iyer, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, would submit that the purported allotment was made in favour of the Company by the Board without making any enquiry as regard the area of the land it actually needed nor there had been any application of mind in relation thereto. The property having been acquired under a statute is a public property, contends Mr. Iyer, and being trustees thereof, the Board was required to take extreme care and caution in relation thereto. It was contended that the High Court had rightly found that for all intent and purport such vast tract of land had been sold to the Company although apparently allotted for a period of 11 years and thereafter the Company would be entitled to obtain sale deed in relation to the demised land. At the relevant time, Mr. Iyer argued, neither any project report had been submitted by the Company nor any material was placed to show that the Company required such vast tract of land.
SCOPE OF THE PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION:
17. The Company intended to set up more than one unit. For the purpose of achieving the objective of economic development of the State, the State is entitled to deal with the applications of the entrepreneurs in an appropriate manner. For the said purpose a High Level Committee was constituted. The said Committee held its meeting on 10.10.1994 wherein not only the members referred to hereinbefore but also various other officers were present. Presumably, prior thereto the applications filed by the Company were scrutinized by the competent authorities. After detailed discussions, the High Level Committee resolved:
(a) to permit the unit to change the location from Malur Indl. Area to Dobespet Industrial Area:
(b) to allot a total of 500 acres of land for the three projects viz., Colour Picture Tube, Colour Televisions and Battery in Dobespet Industrial Area. Nelamangala tq., in lieu of the earlier allotment of 100 acres of land at Malur Indl. Area for the Colour TV sets project, subject to the promoters indicating the individual land requirement for Colour Picture Tubs project, Colour TV project and the battery project duly justifying the requirement with necessary plans, block diagrams, etc.
18. As regard incentives, it was resolved:
"(3) INCENTIVES: The HLC resolved to offer the following incentives:
100% exemption of sales tax (KST, CST & Turnover Tax) on sale of finished goods for a period of 8 years or deferment for a period of 10 years from the date of commencement of commercial production subject to a limit of 100% of the value of the fixed assets, The present level of ST revenue from the company from TV manufacturing is to be maintained.
(ii) Exemption from payment of Purchase Tax (ST on purchase by the co) on capital goods/ equipment worth more than Rs. 1,00 crore (Rupees one crore) in each individual case during the construction phase of the project."
19. Similar considerations were made in respect of Colour Television Picture Tube Project of the Company and Manufacture of Batteries. The matter relating to allotment of land is a statutory function on the part of the Board, In terms of the provisions of the Act, consultations with the State Government is required if Regulation 13 of the Regulations in place of Regulation 7 is to be taken recourse to. Does it mean that consultations must be held in a particular manner, i.e., by exchange of correspondences and in no other? Answer to the said questions must be rendered in negative. The High Level Committee was chaired by the Minister who in terms of the Rules of Executive Business framed under Article 166 of the Constitution of India was entitled to represent the State. Once a consultation takes place by mutual discussions and a consensus is arrived at between different authorities performing different functions under the statutes, the purpose for which consultation was to be made would stand satisfied. Under the Act or the Regulations framed thereunder, no procedure for holding such consultations had been laid down. In that situation it was open to the competent authorities to evolve their own procedure. Such a procedure of taking a decision upon deliberations does not fall foul of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. No malice of fact has been alleged in the instant case. The High Court has proceeded to pronounce its judgment Inter alia on the ground that the price of the land should have been fixed at Rs. 8,00,000/- per acre. In support of the said decision, the High Court has relied upon a grant at the aforementioned rate. However, it was pointed out by the Board:
"It is submitted that the land allotted to respondent No. 4 was not fully developed by this petitioner except some infrastructural facilities which have been counted while calculating the price of the land. The land allotted to individual entrepreneurs is fully developed with all infrastructural facilities. There cannot be any equality between unequals. The cost of the land is arrived at by this petitioner taking into consideration the cost of acquisition, cost of partial development, service and establishment charges."
20. This aspect of the matter did not receive due attention of the High Court despite its merit.
21. It is a well-settled principle of law that different considerations arise for the purpose of fixation of price in respect of price of land i.e. for a small area vis-a-vis, a large area. The allotment price was Rs. Rs. 3,72,324/- per acre which, having regard to the policy decision of the State as also the facts and circumstances of the case cannot be said to be wholly arbitrary warranting interference by the Court. There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that normally allotment of such industrial plots should be done in terms of Regulation 7 aforementioned. But the same by itself did not preclude the authorities of the Board and the State having regard to the fact situation obtaining herein to take recourse to Regulation 13. Once the Court finds that the power exercised by the statutory authorities can be traced to a provision of statute, unless and until violation of mandatory provisions thereof are found out and/ or it is held that a decision is taken for unauthorized or illegal purpose, the court will not ordinarily interfere either with the policy decision or any decision taken by the executive authorities pursuant to or in furtherance thereof.
22. Malice in common law or acceptance means ill will against a person, but in legal sense means a wrongful act done intentionally without just cause or excuse.
CASE LAWS OPERATING IN THE FIELD:
23. In G.B. Mahajan and Ors. v. Jalgaon Municipal Council and Ors. MANU/SC/0284/1991 : AIR1991SC1153 , this Court stated:
"46. While it is true that principles of judicial review apply to the exercise by a government body of its contractual powers, the inherent limitations on the scope of the inquiry are themselves a part of those principles. For instance, in a matter even as between the parties, there must be shown a public law element to the contractual decision before judicial review is invoked. In the present case the material placed before the court falls far short of what the law requires to justify interference."