MANU/SC/1315/2012
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 4333 of 2012 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 35473 of 2011)
Decided On: 08.05.2012
Appellants: Chandigarh Administration and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Manohar Singh
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
G.S. Singhvi and S.J. Mukhopadhaya, JJ.
Subject: Consumer
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986 [REPEALED] - Section 17
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14; Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 17, Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 24A
Cases Referred:
Hira Tikkoo vs. Union Territory, Chandigarh and Ors. MANU/SC/0337/2004
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:


Relied On
  1

ORDER
1. Leave granted. In response to an advertisement issued by the Chandigarh Administration on 14.04.1981, the Respondent applied for allotment of plot in Industrial Area Phase-II, Chandigarh and deposited Rs. 5000/- as earnest money. In all, 3735 applications were received by the administration for allotment of the plots of different sizes. In the draw held on 30.11.1982, the Respondent was allotted Plot No. 1289. However, possession of the plot could not be given to him because the Central Government had, after taking cognizance of the fact that large portion of Industrial Area Phase-II, Chandigarh had been declared as a reserved forest in 1961, directed the Chandigarh Administration to stop further action in the matter of allotment of plots.
2. Some of the allottees filed writ petitions in the Punjab and Haryana High Court in 1987 for issue of a direction to the Appellants to deliver possession of the plots allotted to them in 1982. During the pendency of the writ petitions, the Chandigarh Administration decided to accommodate 250 allottees by giving them plots of smaller size at another location. In furtherance of that decision, letter dated 05.02.1991 was issued to the allottees and they were asked to give consent for allotment of the plots of smaller size. Some of the allottees gave their consent but many others did not do so. Instead they filed writ petitions and prayed for issue of a direction to the Appellants to hand over possession of the plots already allotted.
3. All the writ petitions were dismissed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court on 15.11.1991. The letters patent appeals filed by the unsuccessful Petitioners and fresh writ petitions filed by the non-consentees were disposed of by the Division Bench of the High Court vide judgment dated 30.08.2001, the relevant extracts of the operative portion of which read as under:
"1. The prayer of the Appellant-petitioners for directing the authorities of the Chandigarh Administration to hand over possession of the plots allotted on the basis of draw held in November 1982 is rejected.
2. However, the authorities of the Chandigarh Administration are directed to issue allotment letters to those Appellant-petitioners who had given consent for allotment of alternative plots of smaller sizes and who were successful in the draw held on 27-3-1991. They should be charged price at the rate prevailing on the date of draw.
3. Those who were declared successful in the draw held on 27-3-1991 but cannot be allotted plots due to non-availability of sufficient land in the wake of prohibition imposed vide notification dated 5-1-1988 shall be allotted plots in any other scheme already framed or which may be framed hereafter by the Chandigarh Administration.
4. Those who were declared successful in the draw held in 1982, but did not give consent for allotment of alternative plots shall be refunded the amount deposited by them with interest at the rate of 12% from the date of deposit till the date of actual payment.
5. Within one month from the date of receipt of this order, the Chandigarh Administration shall get published in The Tribune the list of the applicants who had given consent for allotment of alternative plots and were declared successful in the draw held on 27-3-1991 specifying the number of plots earmarked for them.
6. Notification dated 28-4-2000 is held inapplicable and inoperative qua the allotments made to the Appellant-petitioners on the basis of the draw held on 27-3-1991."
4. The special leave petitions filed against the aforesaid judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court were entertained and disposed of by this Court vide judgment titled Hira Tikkoo v. Union Territory, Chandigarh and Ors. MANU/SC/0337/2004 : (2004) 6 SCC 765: 2004(2) HRR 152 S.C. The question whether the doctrine of estoppel could be invoked for compelling the Chandigarh Administration to deliver possession of the plots to the successful applicants was answered by this Court in negative by making the following observations:
"The allottees of the plots are, no doubt, faced with an uncertain situation with loss already caused to them due to negligence and mistake on the part of the Planning Authorities of the Chandigarh Administration. In preparing the development scheme, the existing notification reserving major part of land as forest under the Indian Forest Act and restriction on construction in the periphery of 900 metres from the air force base under the Aircraft Act were overlooked. As we have held above, on a representation that the land is available for allotment of industrial plots, the allottees staked their money and plans for setting up their industries. The representations made to them by the Planning Authorities have turned out to be misleading as a substantial part of the land could not have been included in the development scheme. The allottees paid price for the plots and incurred expenses in preparing their industrial projects. We have held above that the doctrines of "legitimate expectation" and "estoppel" cannot be applied against the Administration to compel it to allot the original plots because that would be permitting violation of statutes intended to conserve forest and restrictions imposed in the interests of general public and security of nation under the Aircraft Act. The doctrine of "estoppel" cannot, therefore, be allowed to be urged against the Administration. This Court cannot direct the Administration to commit breach of statutory provisions and thus harm general public interests. De Smith, Woolf and Jowell in their authoritative book Judicial Review of Administrative Action (5th Edn., at p. 565, para 13-028), have stated one of the principles of public law powers thus: "A public body with limited powers cannot bind itself to act outside of its authorised powers; and if it purports to do so it can repudiate its undertaking, for it cannot extend its powers by creating an estoppel.
Surely, the doctrine of estoppel cannot be applied against public authorities when their mistaken advice or representation is found to be in breach of a statute and therefore, against general public interest. The question, however, is whether the parties or individuals, who had suffered because of the mistake and negligence on the part of the statutory public authorities, would have any remedy of redressal for the loss they have suffered. The "rules of fairness" by which every public authority is bound, require them to compensate loss occasioned to private parties or citizens who were misled in acting on such mistaken or negligent advice of the public authority. There are no allegations and material in these cases to come to a conclusion that the action of the authorities was mala fide. It may be held to be careless or negligent. In some of the English cases, the view taken is that the public authorities cannot be absolved of their liability to provide adequate monetary compensation to the parties who are adversely affected by their erroneous decisions and actions. But in these cases, any directions to the public authorities to pay monetary compensation or damages would also indirectly harm general public interest. The public authorities are entrusted with public fund raised from public money. The funds are in trust with them for utilisation in public interest and strictly for the purposes of the statute under which they are created with specific statutory duties imposed on them. In such a situation when a party or citizen has relied, to his detriment, on an erroneous representation made by public authorities and suffered loss and where the doctrine of "estoppel" will not be invoked to his aid, directing administrative redressal would be a more appropriate remedy than payment of monetary compensation for the loss caused by non-delivery of the possession of the plots and consequent delay caused in setting up industries by the allottees. (See Administrative Law by H.W.R. Wade and C.F. Forsyth, 8th Edn., at pp. 370-73. Also the book Judicial Review of Administrative Action by de Smith, Woolf and Jowell, 5th Edn., at p. 565, para 13-028.)
In the predicament aforesaid, the Administration has adopted a fair attitude. It has come out with a proposal to give alternative plots but of smaller sizes because of the paucity of land available in development schemes in Phases I and II. The statutory compulsion and the Rule of fairness have both to be evenly balanced. This Court cannot allow the Administration to commit breach of law and harm public interest. At the same time, it cannot be absolved of its liability to give appropriate redressal and compensation to the parties and citizens who have suffered loss because of their grossly mistaken decisions and actions. The allottees of the plots, when they were given option to accept alternative plots of smaller sizes, ought to have accepted the offer being the appropriate compensation to them in the circumstances obtaining. The allottees who have consented to accept alternative plots even of smaller sizes and Ors. who did not consent, maybe, because they were in litigation and required plots of bigger sizes, constitute two different groups requiring different treatment in the matter of directing grant of appropriate redressal to them by the Administration."