MANU/SC/0941/2012
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Suo Moto W.P. (C) No. 284 of 2012
Decided On: 17.09.2012
Appellants: Court On Its Own Motion
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
B.S. Chauhan and Swatanter Kumar, JJ.
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
JUDGMENT
1. The report of the High Powered Committee has been filed. Mr. Rohinton F. Nariman, learned Solicitor General has placed on record summary of the report as well. The copy of the report is available with all the parties. Let comments, if any, be filed by the parties within two weeks from today as prayed by all. We make it clear that no further time would be allowed for this purpose.
2. We have also impressed upon the learned Counsel appearing for the parties to apply their minds in regard to various aspects of this case, with greater emphasis on infrastructure and medical facilities to be provided to the yatris. It is also required to be considered whether upon passing of the principal directions in the present case the environmental and ecological angle should be left to specialized tribunal or the petition should continue in this Court.
3. Let the comments, if any, be filed within the time granted. The learned Counsel appearing for the applicant-M/s. Piramal Healthcare Pvt. Ltd. (in I.A. No. 4/2012) submits that they are willing to advance money as they have stated in their application. However, how that fund would be utilised is the matter that needs to be considered. We shall consider that aspect after hearing the State and the Shrine Board.
4. Mr. M.N. Krishnamani, learned senior Counsel states that he appears for the Intervenors Shiv Sewa Samiti (in I.A. No. 3/2012) which were Petitioners in the writ petition before the Jammu & Kashmir High Court that had been filed some time back. However, that writ petition has been disposed of by the High Court in view of the pendency of the present petition. Let a copy of the report be also furnished to him and intervenors may also file their comments to the report within two weeks. List the matter on 5th October, 2012 at 2.00 p.m.
© Manupatra Information Solutions Pvt. Ltd.