MANU/SC/1094/2012
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Suo Motu Writ Petition (Civil) No. 284 of 2012 (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Decided On: 13.12.2012
Appellants: Court on its Own Motion
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
B.S. Chauhan and Swatanter Kumar, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: M.I. Qadri, AG, Sidharth Luthra, ASG, Mukul Gupta, Upinder K. Jalali and M.N. Krishnamani, Sr. Advs., Gaurav Pachnanda, AAG, Ranjana Narayan, Devina Sehgal, Rajat Mathur, T.A. Khan, B. Krishna Prasad, Shreekant N. Terdal, Sunil Fernandes, Vernika Tomar, Rahul Sharma, Raghav Chadha, Insha Mir, Mishra Saurabh, Rani Chhabra, D. Bharat Kumar, Rajeev Singh, V. Pattabhi Ram, Saqyooj Mohan Das, Kritika Sharma, Rekha Palli, A.V. Palli and Anupam Raina, Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 16; CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 14
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 141, Constitution Of India - Article 142, Constitution Of India - Article 144, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(d), Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(g), Constitution Of India - Article 19(5), Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 25, Constitution Of India - Article 25(2), Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 32(1), Constitution Of India - Article 32(2), Constitution Of India - Article 39(e), Constitution Of India - Article 41, Constitution Of India - Article 43, Constitution Of India - Article 48-A, Constitution Of India - Article 48A
Cases Referred:
Glanrock Estate Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0689/2010 : (2010) 10 SCC 96; Consumer Education and Research Centre v. Union of India MANU/SC/0175/1995 : (1995) 3 SCC 42; C.E.S.C. Ltd. v. Subhash Chandra Bose MANU/SC/0466/1992 : (1992) 1 SCC 441; Bhim Singh v. Union of India MANU/SC/0327/2010 : (2010) 5 SCC 538; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/0092/1986 : (1987) 1 SCC 395; Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India; Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0786/1997 : (1997) 6 SCC 241; Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa; Vineet Narain v. Union of India MANU/SC/0827/1998 : (1998) 1 SCC 226; University of Kerala v. Council of Principals of Colleges, Kerala and Ors. (2010) 1 SCC 353; Laxmi Kant Pandey v. Union of India; In Re: Ramlila Maidan Incident MANU/SC/0131/2012 : (2012) 5 SCC 1
Disposition:
Disposed of
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  10

Mentioned
  2

Case Note:
Constitution of India - Articles 21 and 32--Right to life guaranteed under Article 21--Poor arrangements and number of deaths occurring during yatra in 2012 to holy cave of Amarnathji --Necessary directions issued.

It is apparently the constitutional obligation of the Supreme Court to issue specific directions in addition or which are to be read mutatis mutandis to the Report of the Special High Powered Committee (S.H.P.C.) In the above background, it is axiomatic to issue the following directions:

(1) The report of the S.H.P.C. is hereby accepted in terms of this judgment.

(2) The recommendations contained in the report shall be read, construed and applied in aid to the directions of the Supreme Court and not in derogation thereto.

(3) All the recommendations contained in the report shall be implemented under two different heads, i.e., 'short-term measures' and 'long-term measures'. This categorization shall be made by the Sub-Committee consisting of the following:

(a) Chief Secretary of the State of Jammu and Kashmir:

(b) Secretary, Home, State of Jammu and Kashmir; and

(c) C.E.O. of the Amarnathji Shrine Board.

(4) Steps in relation to health care, improvement of walking tracks, providing of pre-fabricated toilets, tents, pre-fabricated walking path/mats, construction of S.T.Ps. and providing of one way tracks shall be treated as short-term measures.

(5) The Court hereby directs the Chief Secretary of every State to notify the hospitals and medical officers in those hospitals who shall issue health certificates to all the persons who are desirous of going for yatra henceforth. The authorities shall place such notification in the public domain and give it due publicity. These certificates shall be issued free of cost.

(6) The Court directs the Chief Secretary and Secretary, Health of each respective State, particularly, the State of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Union Territory of Chandigarh to depute such number of doctors during the relevant period to the State of Jammu and Kashmir for ensuring due health care of the pilgrims, as may be necessary.

(7) The State of Jammu and Kashmir shall write to the Chief Secretaries/Secretaries, Health of each State by 30th of April of every year, making requisition for the number of doctors and the area of specialization from which such doctors are required. The concerned State shall inform the Chief Secretary /Secretary, Health and the Director General of Health Services of the State of Jammu and Kashmir by 30th May of the year, the names with specialization of the doctors who have been deputed for the yatra period at the State of Jammu and Kashmir and actually direct and inform the concerned doctors of their 'temporary duty', in public interest, with the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

(8) The medical teams shall be deployed en route to the Holy Cave at a regular distance not exceeding two kilometres.

(9) The State of Jammu & Kashmir and the Shrine Board shall provide infrastructure, equipment, medicines and all other ancillary items thereto to the medical teams to ensure that the pilgrims can be provided adequate treatment without any loss of time. Largest number of medical teams shall be deputed at the glacier and the passage near the Holy Shrine.

(10) The State of Jammu and Kashmir shall make due provision for providing lodging and boarding to doctors on 'temporary ditty' and ensure that they are not put to any inconvenience, in any respect, whatsoever.

(11) The State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Shrine Board shall make due provision for registration of the yatris as proposed in the report and preferably at Srinagar, Baltal, Chandanvadi, Panchtarni, etc.

(12) The S.T.Ps. shall be constructed at all places, particularly at Baltal. Clearance for that purpose shall be granted by all the concerned departments expeditiously and in accordance with law. This direction of the Court shall be complied with notwithstanding the pendency of any litigation before any Court, including the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir.

(13) The request of the applicant M/s. Piramal Healthcare Pvt. Ltd. (In I.A. No. 4 of 2012) for providing pre-fabricated tents or toilets or such other material which they may chose to offer or desired by the authorities, shall be considered by the Shrine Board in its discretion. However, it is observed that the request of the applicant should be considered sympathetically and objectively.

(14) The walking track/passages should be widened and railing and retaining walls be provided. The extent of width of the passage and manner of providing the railing (thick iron cables supported by wooden blocks or cement and stone) shall be in the discretion of the Sub-Committee aforeconstituted. But, it is made clear that width of no passage shall be less than 12 feet, particularly, that of the track leading from Panchtarni to the Holy Shrine.

(15) Neither the Court has directed nor should be understood to have implicitly directed that there should be mettled motorable road in place of the walking tracks/passages.

(16) There shall be provided separate one way passage for palkis and horses as one unit and the pedestrians as the other, near to and at the passages leading to the Holy Shrine. Preferably on this passage pre-fabricated walking path/matting should be provided.

(17) All other walking tracks from various other points, like Baltal, Panchtarni and Chandanvadi may be covered either by pre-fabricated rough cement tiles or such other material, which in the opinion of the S.H.P.C., would be most appropriate for the benefit of the pilgrims.

(18) Attempt should be made to construct shelters on the passage/walking paths at regular intervals. Temporary/prefabricated shelters should certainly be provided near the Holy Shrine where large number of persons collect and have to wait for long hours for darshan.

(19) At the Holy Cave, the existing grill should be replaced by 100 per cent transparent fiber or any other material to ensure that the darshan to the shivlingam is not visually obstructed. In the alternative, the iron grills, as installed can be permitted, but the gaps between the parallel bars, which are perpendicular to the earth, should not be less than 12 inches, as they would help in giving a clear visual darshan of the shivlingam and the shiv parivar. The implementation of the above suggestion should be left to the wisdom of the Sub-Committee.

(20) The Sub-Committee constituted under this order shall be at liberty to consult or obtain opinion of any expert body, as it may deem fit and proper, in the facts and circumstances.

(21) All the above directions and the recommendations made in the report of the S.H.P.C. should be carried out by all concerned without demur or protest and expeditiously. It is made clear that any officer of any State irrespective of his position in the State hierarchy shall personally be held liable and proceeded against in the event of default and/or violation of the above directions /recommendations of the S.H.P.C.

(22) The Chief Secretary, Secretary, Health of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the C.E.O. of the Shrine Board shall personally be responsible and answerable for strict compliance of the recommendations of the report of S.H.P.C. and/or directions as contained in this judgment. Since we are holding the Sub-Committee personally liable for compliance of the order of the Court, with liberty to this Sub-Committee to seek clarification, if any, at any time.

(23) The Sub-Committee is also given liberty to bring to the notice of this Court if any authority/officer/the Government fails to render the required help or take desired action and/or is instrumental in violating the orders and directions of the Court.
JUDGMENT
Swatanter Kumar, J.
1. Taking notice of the persistent press reports dealing with the poor arrangements and number of deaths that occurred during the yatra in the year 2012 to the holy cave of Amarnathji, the Court took suo motu action and issued notice to the Union of India, State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Chairman/President of the Amarnathji Shrine Board vide its order dated 13th July, 2012. It will be appropriate to reproduce the said order at this stage itself:
Today's 'The Times of India' and 'Hindustan Times' reports 67 deaths of pilgrims mostly because of the cardiac arrests as well for other reasons. As per these reports, this has happened in 17 days. Last year 105 persons died during the 45 days' yatra. Thus, this year it appears to be on the rise. In our considered view, the pilgrims have a constitutional right under Articles 21 and 19(1)(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India, free of fear, with dignity and safety and to ensure enforcement of such right is the primary obligation of the State and the Central Governments.
Where it is a matter of common knowledge that the yatra to the 'Holy Cave of Amarnath' is an occasion of privilege and pride for a devotee, there it is also a matter of great concern for the Government of India, the Government of the State of Jammu & Kashmir and the Amarnath Shrine Board. Some of the events that have been widely reported in the newspapers compel us to take a judicial notice of the lack of necessary facilities, essential amenities and the risk to the lives of the yatris, en route and around the "Holy Cave of Amarnath".
On 3rd July, 2012, it was reported in the Hindustan Times, Delhi Edition, that two more pilgrims died of cardiac arrest on Sunday, taking the toll to 22. Both the pilgrims were stated to be in their mid-thirties. One pilgrim was on her way to the holy shrine while the other was returning to Pahalgam Base Camp (Names: Ms. Anita Chourasia and Sadhu Ram). The same daily on 2nd of July, 2012 had reported that there were deaths of five more devotees as a result of cardiac arrest at the Pahalgam and Baltal Base Camps. These were the deaths reported to have occurred between 25th June, 2012 to 2nd July, 2012 on the twin tracks of Baltal in Ganderbal and Pahalgam in Amarnath. This daily also reported that nearly 1.20 lakh pilgrims had so far paid obeisance to the shivalingam at the holy cave. This newspaper also showed the path and the weather conditions to which the yatris to the Holy Cave were exposed and the amenities that were available at the glacier.
The Times of India, New Delhi Edition on 29th June, 2012 had reported that there was an unidentified body of 55-year old pilgrim which was recovered along the Pehalgam cave route in Anantnag district.
Similarly, on 28th June, 2012, the Hindustan Times, while referring that the Management had directed increase of security at the yatri base camps to maintain proper schedule, had reported that the death toll within the first three days of the commencement of the yatra was six. The same newspaper dated 27th June, 2012 had shown a photograph of the passage that more than 18000 pilgrims had visited the holy cave, which is at the height of 3,880 metres, in three days. It showed one of the passages leading to the holy cave. From this picture itself, it is clear and even otherwise it is a matter of common knowledge that the path leading to the holy cave is not only very small but is even unprotected. The photographs also show that hardly any amenities are available for the yatris in and around the holy cave, though thousands of people who throng the holy cave have to wait for hours and days for having the darshan. It has also been published in other papers that in the initial days of the yatra, one person had died because of the fall from the height as there was no support or protection on the path leading to the holy cave. The path somewhere is stated to be even less than six feet and does not have any grill or protection (like pagdandi), which could prevent the people walking on these constricted paths/passages from falling. All the palkis, horses and even the yatris walking on foot, travel on the same path at the same time, thus causing complete jams on the already tapered paths leading to the holy cave.
With the passage of time, the things have hardly improved. We may refer to what was the situation was in the year 2011, as per the newspaper reports of the relevant/concerned year.
The Indian Express while reporting the commencement of the yatra in its newspaper dated 29th June, 2011 reported that nearly 2.5 lakh pilgrims had registered themselves for the annual pilgrimage with the Amarnath Shrine Board till the aforesaid date and 2000 pilgrims had already left the State of Jammu for the yatra. It also reported a very unfortunate incident where a person named Rajinder Singh, aged 55 years, resident of Jaipur had died due to cardiac arrest at Baltal base camp in Ganderbal district of Kashmir.
Again on 1st July, 2011, the same paper reported that a group of men and women, young, elderly and children with their backpacks walked up the winding steep gradient of the road to the cave shrine. In this report reference was made to the statement of the public that there were no vehicles and it was very difficult for the pilgrims to travel and walk such long distances. From Baltal route, 13,000 pilgrims left while 9000 pilgrims left from Chandanwari for darshan to the holy cave.
With the increase in the number of pilgrims coupled with the poor management, it appears that there was a sharp increase in the casualty rate. In the Indian Express dated 6th July, 2011, it was reported that 18 yatris had died within a week of the commencement of the journey. This included elderly people as well as young victims. One Mr. Vikram Rathore, who died, was only aged 25 years. It appeared from this report that constraints on the availability of medical aid and medical examination is writ large.
The same newspaper on 8th July, 2011 reported that three more pilgrims died during the yatra raising the toll to 27. Even a constable namely Inderjeet Singh posted with 28 Battalion, Central Reserve Police Force (for short 'CRPF'), Srinagar, died of heart attack while returning from the cave. Another person aged about 54 years hailing from Gujarat also died of cardiac arrest at Sangam top much ahead of the shrine. Still another detailed article appeared in the Times of India dated 18th July, 2011 detailing the lack of facilities, referring to the rush of the pilgrims at the base points as well as at the holy cave. A pilgrim from Guwahati stated: "Half-an-hour after starting out for the shrine from Panchtarni, which is a place 6 km from the holy cave, we were trapped in a jam for close to two hours. There was not an inch of space on the path. There was pushing and shoving as yatris got restless. A sudden movement or a horse or commotion in a section of the crowd could have caused a big stampede". Referring to the statement of an officer, the report stated that the pilgrims had to be regulated from the base camps and there was very little that the members of the Forces could do at the narrow pathways or the holy cave to control the situation. Nearly 22,000 pilgrims visited the shrine daily while the limit, as per the administration itself, was reported to be 3,400 per day only. It is again a matter of great regret that obviously because of lack of proper aid and amenities, the death toll had gone upto 85 on 21st July, 2011, as was reported in "The Hindu" of the even date.
All these reports clearly showed disregard to the human life. Lack of facilities at the shrine and on the paths leading to the shrine is evident from all the aforestated articles and the photographs published therein. This Court has repeatedly held that in terms of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, a person has a right to live with dignity and not be subjected to inhuman treatment, particularly in such places where large number of people are bound to visit because of their faith. It can also be hardly disputed that huge revenue is generated as a result of visit of large number of pilgrims to the Holy Cave. The Amarnath Shrine Board receives huge amount of money not only by way of offerings but also from the charges/fee it takes from the pony-owners, palkiwallahs as well as the helicopter services available between Baltal and Panchtarni.
It is also evident that there is a complete lack of adequate essential amenities and facilities for the yatris who come to pay their tribute at the 'Holy Cave at Amarnath'. Lack of medical facilities and limitations of the officers/officials of the Forces are some other facets which need to be considered by the concerned authorities.
It also appears to be a very sensitive place from the environmental point of view and in terms of the provisions of the Environment Act, 1986 and the constitutional obligation placed upon the concerned authorities, it is expected that proper measures be taken to prevent such high death rate, controlling pollution and providing the requisite facilities and improving the services required for successful completion of such yatras.
It is expected of a Government and the concerned authorities to devote more attention and provide appropriate amenities and facilities to protect the life of the individuals, the environment as well as ensure to make the yatra effective and successful, preferably without any human casualty. The authorities cannot shirk from their responsibility of providing minimum essential facilities including medical assistance, roads and other necessary infrastructure. Visit of lacks of people to the State of Jammu & Kashmir generates revenue for the State, in fact, for the residents of that State and add to the need for better tourism facilities. The authorities are also expected to better equip the Forces posted at the holy cave, base points and en route to the holy cave.
It is a settled canon of constitutional law that the doctrine of sustainable development also forms part of Article 21 of the Constitution. The 'precautionary principle' and the 'pollutor-pays principle' flow from the core value in Article 21. The Supreme Court in its judicial dictum in the case of Glanrock Estate Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0689/2010 : (2010) 10 SCC 96 has held "forests in India are an important part of the environment. They constitute a national asset and intergenerational equity is also part of the Article 21 of the Constitution and cautioned that if deforestation takes place rampantly, then intergenerational equity would stand violated.
Right to life is enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution which embodies in itself the right to live with dignity. The State is not only expected but is under a constitutional command to treat every citizen with human dignity and ensure equal treatment to all. In our considered view and as demonstrated by these newspaper reports, inhuman, unsafe and undesirable conditions are prevailing at the base camps and en route to the holy cave. The yatris do have a right and the State is under constitutional obligation to provide safe passages, proper medical aid, appropriate arrangement and at least some shelter to the thousands of yatris visiting the holy cave every day. They are also expected to equip the forces deployed with appropriate equipments facilities and the authorities should ensure that no untoward incident occurs at the holy places. In our view, the following questions arise for consideration of the Court:
1. Whether there exists proper medical facilities to prevent human casualties. Further to provide emergency medical aid in the event of these yatris falling sick because of cardiac and other related problems.?
2. What steps are being taken and have been taken to protect the environment in that area?
3. What essential amenities have been provided at the base camps and en route to the holy cave keeping in view that lakhs of people are visiting the shrine every day.
4. What measures are being taken and methods being adopted for collection and disposal of the waste including domestic and human waste generated by the yatrisen route and around the holy cave?
5. What are the facilities and equipments available, particularly for protecting or treating conditions such as dyspnoea, cardiac arrest and other heart related problems.
6. What is the cause for such high casualty rate and whether there exists the required medical equipments to ensure that in future such casualties can be avoided?
7. What measures and means are available with the authorities on ground for handling such huge crowd and why seven times the requisite number of people coming to visit the cave per day are being permitted and if so, whether there is requisite infrastructure at the site for handling such huge crowd?
The time intervening the previous and the current year clearly demonstrates that the authorities have not taken any effective and appropriate measures for protecting the life of thousands of devotees who visit the holy cave during this limited period, despite the print media repeatedly bringing this to the notice of all concerned. Thus, within the constitutional mandate of Article 21, this Court would have no option but to pass appropriate directions.
All these aspects need to be taken care of by the concerned authorities certainly with greater emphasis and they cannot escape their obligation to provide minimum essential facilities including roads as an approach to the holy cave. They are expected to equip their Forces posted in an around the cave so as to have complete human dignity for the persons working there as well as for the pilgrims coming to the holy cave. They are also expected to make appropriate arrangements for darshans at the holy cave so as to avoid health hazards and injuries, provide proper paths and one-way system passages to the pilgrims to the Holy Cave. Therefore, taking suo motu notice of the articles which are placed below and to appropriately deal with this serious subject, answer the above questions and evolve solutions within the framework of law, we require the following to appear and answer before this Court:
1. Union of India, through its Secretary.
2. Ministry of Environment and Forests, through its Secretary
3. State of Jammu and Kashmir, through its Chief Secretary.
4. Chairman/President of the Amarnathji Shrine Board.
Issue notice, returnable within a week. Dasti.
2. The notice was served upon the concerned Respondents. The Respondents filed their respective replies by way of affidavits on record. Vide order dated 20th July, 2012, when the petition was called on for hearing, the Court, after hearing the counsel appearing for the parties at some length, while noticing the lack of public amenities, facilities, health care and particularly the high rate of mortality and the need to take immediate and effective steps to remedy the same, constituted a Special High Powered Committee (for short 'SHPC'). This SHPC consisted of representatives from different Ministries of the Union of India, Chief Secretary and other officers of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, Director Generals of the Border Security Force and the Border Roads Organizations etc. The SHPC was expected to visit the site and make its recommendations in the form of a Report to the Court inter alia, on the following points:
1. Construction of proper passages, wide enough and with due support on both sides, for the traffic of pedestrian yatris, or horses and by palkis from Panchtarni to the Holy Cave.
2. Providing one-way passage with separate tracks, one for pedestrians and other for horses, carriages and palkis near the Shrine.
3. Providing of health check-up facilities on both the passages from baltal and Panchtarni to the Holy Cave.
4. Providing of proper public amenities and facilities on way and at the lower end of the glaciers near the Holy Cave.
5. All such other steps which are required to be taken for preventing unfortunate deaths of the yatris, going on yatra, to the Holy Cave.
6. Deployment of more forces and to provide better conditions of service for the members of the forces, posted on way and at the Holy Cave.
7. Environmental Impact Assessment.
8. The manner and methods to be adopted to attain the above, with least damage or interference with the environment of the entire zone right from Baltal to the Holy Cave from different routes.
9. Deployment of more medical teams, at regular distance on all the passages leading to the Holy Cave.
10. Registration of yatris at Jammu, Srinagar, Baltal and Panchtarni.
11. It should also consider the possibility of limited number of yatris being released from Srinagar to Baltal to ensure better management, hygiene, healthcare and betterment of the yatris, who stay there overnight.
12. Medical examination at the time of registration and on way.
3. Thereafter, in the order dated 23rd July, 2012, the Court also noticed that within three days the mortality rate had gone up from 84 to 97 which was a matter of great worry for all concerned.
4. The report of the SHPC was submitted along with the affidavit dated 6th September, 2012, sworn by Sh. Madhav Lal, Chief Secretary to the Government of Jammu and Kashmir. This report made its recommendations under eight different heads.
5. Besides dealing with the issues of health, environment, registration, access control & security, track conditions and other public amenities, the Report stated its recommendations under the head 'Summary of Recommendations'.
6. The counsel appearing for the parties, including for the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Shrine Board, submitted before the Court that by and large, the recommendations of the SHPC were acceptable. In fact, they even assured the compliance of the recommendations, subject to statutory clearance from the different authorities. The Court noticed that the recommendations of the SHPC could be divided into two different classes: Short-term perspective and Long-term perspective. Short-time perspective involved the steps which the Government and the Shrine Board were to proceed to take forthwith and which required immediate attention of all the stakeholders. Long-term perspective included steps where the larger element of planning was involved and their compliance was likely to take some time. In that very order, the Court had directed immediate compliance of certain works at Baltal and surrounding areas. They related to sewage system (STP) at Baltal and widening of passage from Baltal to the holy shrine. The Chief Secretary of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Shrine Board were directed to take appropriate steps for planning of matters relating to medical facilities, registration and other ancillary works including deployment of force and one way passage at the Shrine during the next yatra.
7. Vide his letter dated 4th December, 2012, the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, informed the Additional Solicitor General that the affidavit of the State of Jammu and Kashmir had been perused in compliance with the orders of this Court and that the environmental issues had been correctly reflected therein, in accordance with the final report prepared by the SHPC and the Ministry was in agreement with the contents of the affidavit. Similarly, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, vide its letter dated 3rd December, 2012 had also informed the Additional Solicitor General that a meeting was held by the Union Health Secretary with the Government of Jammu and Kashmir and the Chief Executive Officer of the Shrine Board to decide the further course of action on health issues in terms of the report of the SHPC. The issues also related to the States and the Union Territories, identifying the institutions for medical certification and augmenting manpower to support the efforts of the State Government. Inter alia, the points for attention were stated as follows:
(i) Identify Chief Medical Officer/Medical Superintendent/Block Medical Officer/other Government doctors authorized by the State Government for issuance of compulsory health certificate.
(ii) Provide list of private medical institutions authorized by the State Governments to issue compulsory health certificate and
(iii) Make available services of Specialists and General Duty Medical Officers to supplement the efforts of the Govt. of Jammu & Kashmir.
8. From the above narration it is clear that the Union of India, its various Ministries, the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Amarnathji Shrine Board were ad idem in regard to the contents and implementation of the report submitted by the SHPC. During the course of hearing of the petition, applications for intervention were filed, which have also been considered. The interveners and all other stake holders were heard at great length. During the course of hearing, certain further suggestions were made, which were found to be useful and in general public interest.
9. The scheme under the Indian Constitution unambiguously enshrines in itself the right of a citizen to life under Article 21 of the Constitution. The right to life is a right to live with dignity, safety and in a clean environment. The ambit of Article 21 of the Constitution has been expanded by judicial pronouncements consistently. The judgments have accepted such right and placed a clear obligation on the part of the State to ensure meaningful fulfillment of such right. Article 21 of the Constitution, with the development of law has attained wide dimensions, which are in the larger public interest. Furthermore, Article 19(1)(d) gives a citizen the right to move freely throughout the territory of India. This right, of course, like any other right is not absolute in terms or free of restrictions. This right, of course, like any other fundamental freedom is neither absolute in terms nor is free from restrictions. Article 19(5) subjects this right to imposition of reasonable restrictions which the State by law may enact. Such restriction has to be in the interest of general public or for the protection of interest of any Scheduled Tribe besides being reasonable and within its legislative competence. Article 25 deals with the Right to Freedom of Religion, subject to public order, morality, health and other provisions stated in Part III. All persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice and propagate religion. of course, again this right is subject to reasonable restrictions within the ambit of Article 25(2) of the Constitution. In light of these three Articles, now we have to examine which rights of the citizens are being violated and what is the scope of the present proceedings before the court and what directions, if any, the court can issue within the four corners of law. It has undoubtedly and indisputably come on record that the rights of yatris to the holy shrine enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, are being violated. There is admittedly lack of basic amenities and healthcare. The walking tracks are not only deficient but are also not safe for the pedestrians. The management and arrangements for the yatris at the glacier and near the Holy Shrine are, to say the least, pathetic. Keeping in mind the number of yatris who come to pay their homage at the Holy Shrine every year, the management suffers from basic infirmity, discrepancies, inefficiency and ill-planning. The Government of India, State of Jammu and Kashmir and the Shrine Board are under a constitutional obligation to provide free movement, protection and health care facilities along with basic amenities and proper tracks to be used by the yatris.
10. Now, we may examine the dimensions of the rights protected under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The socio-economic justice for people is the very spirit of the preamble of our Constitution. 'Interest of general public' is a comprehensive expression comprising several issues which affect public welfare, public convenience, public order, health, morality, safety etc., all intended to achieve the socio-economic justice for people. In the case of Consumer Education and Research Centre v. Union of India MANU/SC/0175/1995 : (1995) 3 SCC 42, this Court while noticing Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 (for short 'UDHR') asserted that human sensitivity and moral responsibility of every State is that "all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood." The Court also observed "the jurisprudence of personhood or philosophy of the right to life envisaged under Article 21, enlarges its sweep to encompass human personality in its full blossom with invigorated health which is a wealth to the workman to earn his livelihood, to sustain the dignity of person and to live a life with dignity and equality."
11. Not only this, there is still a greater obligation upon the Centre, State and the Shrine Board in terms of Article 48A of the Constitution where it is required to protect and improve the environment. Article 25(2) of the UDHR ensures right to standard of adequate living for health and well-being of an individual including housing and medical care and the right to security in the event of sickness, disability etc. The expression 'life' enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution does not connote mere animal existence or continued drudgery through life. It has a much wider meaning which includes right to livelihood, better standard of living, hygienic conditions in the workplace and leisure. The right to life with human dignity encompasses within its fold, some of the finer facets of human civilization which makes life worth living. The expanded connotation of life would mean the tradition and cultural heritage of the persons concerned. In the case of Consumer Education & Research Centre (supra), the Court discussing the case of C.E.S.C. Ltd. v. Subhash Chandra Bose (MANU/SC/0466/1992 : (1992) 1 SCC 441) stated with approval that in that case the Court had considered the gamut of operational efficacy of human rights and constitutional rights, the right to medical aid and health and held the right to social justice as a fundamental right. The Court further stated that the facilities for medical care and health to prevent sickness, ensure stable manpower for economic development and generate devotion to duty and dedication to give the workers' best performance, physically as well as mentally. The Court particularly, while referring to the workmen made reference to Articles 21, 39(e), 41, 43 and 48-A of the Constitution of India to substantiate that social security, just and humane conditions of work and leisure to workmen are part of his meaningful right to life.
12. Security to citizens by the State is also a very sensitive issue. The State has to draw a careful balance between providing security, without violating fundamental human dignity. In the case of In Re: Ramlila Maidan Incident MANU/SC/0131/2012 : (2012) 5 SCC 1, the Court observed "the primary task of the State is to provide security to all citizens without violating human dignity. Powers conferred upon the statutory authorities have to be, perforce, admitted. Nonetheless, the very essence of constitutionalism is also that no organ of the State may arrogate to itself powers beyond what is specified in the Constitution."
13. In Bhim Singh v. Union of India MANU/SC/0327/2010 : (2010) 5 SCC 538, while referring to the obligations of the State and its functions, the Court held:
53. ..it is also settled by this Court that in interpreting the Constitution, due regard has to be given to the Directive Principles which has been recorded as the soul of the Constitution in the context of India being the welfare State. It is the function of the State to secure to its citizens "social, economic and political justice", to preserve "liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship" and to ensure "equality of status and of opportunity" and "the dignity of the individuals" and the "unity of the nation". This is what the Preamble of our Constitution says and that is what which is elaborated in the two vital chapters of the Constitution on Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of the State Policy.