MANU/SC/1258/2015
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 554, 658, 1587, 1589 of 2006, Transfer Case (Civil) Nos. 32, 33, 36 of 2007, 1, 3 of 2008, 49 of 2009, Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 27 of 2008, 343 of 2009, 246 of 2010 and Transfer Case (Civil) No. 107 of 2015 (Arising out of Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 568 of 2014)
Decided On: 27.10.2015
Appellants: Director General of Foreign Trade and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Kanak Exports and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.K. Sikri and Rohinton Fali Nariman, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Pinky Anand, ASG, Yashank Adhyaru, Sr. Adv., Ajay Sharma, Sudarshan Singh Rawat, Rashmi Malhotra, Kiran Bhardwaj, D.S. Mahra, A. Subba Rao, Annam D.N. Rao, Sudipto Sircar, Neelam Jain, Vaishali R., Annam Venkatesh, Ankita Chadha, K.L.D.S. Vinober, Tarun Gulati, Kishore Kunal, Sparsh Bhargava, Manish Rastogi, Praveen Kumar, Shashi Mathews, Anupam Mishra, Alok Yadav, Somnath Shukla, Udit Jain, K.R. Sasiprabhu, Rohan P. Shah, Vishnu Sharma, Shilpa Balani, Swati Jain, Bina Gupta, Manu Nair, Tanuj Bhushan, Advs. for Suresh A. Shroff and Co., Kamlendra Mishra, Shyam Divan, Sameer Parekh, E.R. Kumar, Nitin Thukral, Galav Sharma, Shashank Bhansali, Advs. for Parekh and Co. and V.K. Venna, Adv.
Subject: Civil
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 3, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 3(2), Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 5, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 6, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 6(3), Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 15, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 16, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 19, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 19(2), Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 90, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 91, Foreign Trade Development and Regulation Act, 1992 - Section 93; Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 [Repealed]; General Clauses Act, 1977 - Section 14, General Clauses Act, 1977 - Section 21; Customs Act, 1962 - Section 25, Customs Act, 1962 - Section 25(1); Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1965 - Section 29(2); Andhra Pradesh Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1979; Limitation Act, 1963 - Section 5; Delhi Co-Operative Societies Act, 1972 - Section 12, Delhi Co-Operative Societies Act, 1972 - Section 88; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 115; Customs Regulations; Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 19(1), Constitution of India - Article 148, Constitution of India - Article 309
Cases Referred:
Adani Exports Ltd. and Anr. v. Union of India and Anr. Special Civil Application No. 1676 of 2004; State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors. v. Nandlal Jaiswal and Ors. MANU/SC/0034/1986 : (1986) 4 SCC 566; R.K. Garg v. Union of India MANU/SC/0074/1981 : (1981) 4 SCC 675; Morey v. Doud 354 US 457; Metropolis Theatre Co. v. State of Chicago 57 L Ed 730; Permian Basin Area Rate 20 L Ed (2d) 312; Zippers Karamchari Union v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0572/1998 : (2000) 10 SCC 619; BALCO Employees Union (Regd.) v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0779/2001 : (2002) 2 SCC 333; Accountant General and Anr. v. S. Doraiswamy and Ors. MANU/SC/0407/1980 : (1981) 4 SCC 93; Kasinka Trading v. Union of India MANU/SC/0170/1995 : (1995) 1 SCC 274; Malhotra and Sons v. Union of India MANU/JK/0027/1975 : AIR 1976 J and K 41; Shrijee Sales Corporation v. Union of India MANU/SC/1099/1997 : (1999) 3 SCC 398; Union of India and Ors. v. Asian Food Industries MANU/SC/8538/2006 : (2006) 13 SCC 542; State of Rajasthan and Ors. v. Basant Agrotech (India) Ltd. MANU/SC/1261/2013 : (2013) 15 SCC 1; Mahabir Vegetable Oils (P) Ltd. v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/8022/2006 : (2006) 3 SCC 620; Commissioner of Income Tax v. Vatika Township Private Ltd. MANU/SC/0810/2014 : (2015) 1 SCC 1; Phillips v. Eyre (1870) LR 6 QB 1; LOffice Cherifien des Phosphates v. Yamashita-Shinnihon Steamship Co. Ltd. MANU/UKHL/0046/1993 : (1994) 1 AC 486; Keshavlal Jethalal Shah v. Mohanlal Bhagwandas and Anr. MANU/SC/0164/1968 : (1968) 3 SCR 623; Trimbak Damodhar Rajpurkar v. Assaram Hiraman Patil and Ors. MANU/SC/0344/1961 : (1962) Supp. 1 SCR 700; West v. Gwynne; Jivabhai Purshottam v. Chhagan Karson Civil Appeal No. 153 of 1958; Durlabbhai Fakirbhai v. Jhaverbhai Bhikabhai (1956) 58 BLR 85; Sakuru v. Tanaji MANU/SC/0241/1985 : (1985) 3 SCC 590; Union of India v. N.R. Parmar MANU/SC/1022/2012 : (2012) 13 SCC 340; B.S. Vadera v. Union of India MANU/SC/0160/1968 : AIR 1969 SC 118; Gopichand v. Delhi Administration MANU/SC/0056/1959 : AIR 1959 SC 609; Lachmi Narayan and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0012/1975 : (1976) 2 SCC 953; State of Kerala and Ors. v. K.G. Madhavan Pillai and Ors. MANU/SC/0479/1988 : (1988) 4 SCC 669; Union of India and Ors. v. Welspun India Limited LPA No. 290 of 2007; Regional Transport Officer, Chittoor and Ors. v. Associated Transport Madras (P) Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0334/1980 : (1980) 4 SCC 597; A.A. Calton v. Director of Education and Anr. MANU/SC/0047/1983 : (1983) 3 SCC 33; Chairman, Railway Board and Ors. v. C.R. Rangadhamaiah and Ors. MANU/SC/0954/1997 : (1997) 6 SCC 626
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 04.07.2005 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 2397 of 2004
Case Category:
INDIRECT TAXES MATTERS - IMPORT / EXPORT POLICY
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  1

Mentioned
  18

Relied On
  7

Case Note:
Customs - Validity of Notifications - Amendment to EXIM policy - Export Import (EXIM) Policy 2002-2007 -Framed by Central Government - Section 5 of Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 - Special Scheme incorporated - Provisions giving incentives to exporters of some specified items - Amendments made vide Notification No. 28 - Public Notice No. 40 also issued - Followed by Notification No. 38 and 40 - Government announced exclusion of export performance - Relation to four classes of goods -Amendment unpalatable to exporters - Filed Writ Petitions - Pending in various High Courts - Transfer petitions allowed - Whether Notifications were issued in public interest - Whether the Notification No. 28 is valid - Whether Notification No. 28 dated January 28, 2004 vide which Notes 1 to 5 to para 3.7.2.1 were inserted in the EXIM Policy 2002-2007 was only clarificatory in nature or it amounted to amendment of the provisions of para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy - Whether Public Notice No. 40 dated January 28, 2004, issued by the DGFT, which sought to exclude the export performance related to class of goods, is without jurisdiction - Whether the Notifications are bad in law on the ground that they seek to apply retrospectively - Whether, in the case of exporters, the exports shown by them can be treated as actual exports entitling them to avail the benefit of the Scheme - Whether para 3.7.8 of the EXIM Policy 2004-2009 and Notification Nos. 48/2005 and 8/2006 constitutionally valid

Facts:

Export Import (EXIM) Policy 2002-2007 was framed by the Central Government Under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (the Act). The main purpose and objective of this Policy was to boost the exports. In furtherance of the same, a Special Scheme containing the provisions thereof was incorporated therein which gave certain kind of incentives to the exporters of some specified items. However, some amendments were made thereto vide Notification No. 28. On the same day, Public Notice No. 40(RE-2003)/2002-2007 was also issued in exercise of powers conferred under the provisions of Para 2.4 of the said Policy, which was followed by Notification No. 38 and Notification No. 40.

Vide Notification No. 28, the Central Government sought to amend certain provisions of the EXIM Policy by inserting Notes 1 to 5, which was unpalatable to the exporters of the goods mentioned therein as, according to them, under the guise of the said Notes, some benefits which had already accrued to these exporters under the EXIM Policy were taken away. Vide Public Notice No. 40, the Government announced exclusion of export performance in relation to four classes of goods mentioned in para 2 thereof from computation of the entitlement under the Scheme and, at the same time, sought to disallow the import of agricultural products falling under Chapters I to XXIV of ITC (HS) under the said scheme. Thereafter, Notification No. 38 was published Under Section 5 of the Act on the same lines on which Public Notice No. 40 was issued. The exporters of these goods, naturally, felt aggrieved thereby. There was an innocuous amendment to Notification No. 38 wherein in addition to the Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) as an Officer to enforce these Notifications, ex-officio Additional Secretary to the Government of India was also added. All such exporters who were affected thereby filed writ petitions in various High Courts.

The Bombay High Court has given partial relief to the exporters/writ Petitioners. The Gujarat High Court has substantially affirmed the validity of these Notifications while giving relief on one particular aspect. Insofar as judgments of Bombay High Court and Gujarat High Court are concerned, both the Union of India as well as the writ Petitioners preferred Special Leave Petitions, in which leave was granted, and these are now converted as Civil Appeals. That apart, the Single Judge of the Gujarat High Court in one of the cases dismissed the writ petition and the LPA was filed by the said Petitioner before the Division Bench of the High Court. Since the issue involved in these appeals is the same, which is raised in the LPA in the Gujarat High Court and still pending in the writ petitions filed in various High Courts, transfer petitions were filed by the Union of India seeking transfer of all those cases and to be heard along with these two appeals. Those transfer petitions were allowed. This is how all these cases are bunched together and heard simultaneously as the issue is substantially the same in all these matters.

In the transfer cases, challenge is to the constitutional validity of para 3.7.8 of the EXIM Policy 2004-2009 as well as Notification No. 48/2005 dated February 20, 2006 and Notification No. 8/2006 dated June 12, 2006 by which certain amendments in the aforesaid EXIM Policy were made. Though it involves a different Scheme, known as 'Target Plus Scheme', since the provisions and amendments are again primarily challenged on the ground that these amendments are given retrospective effect from April 01, 2005, these matters were also analogously heard with the other batch of cases.

Held, while disposing of the appeals

(1) Before adverting to the analytical discussion and deciding the validity of impugned Notifications and public notice, keeping in mind the legal principles, the Court first discussed the background in which they came to be issued. The Court observed that the main objective of the scheme was to achieve the share of 1% of global trade and accelerated growth in exports. For this purpose, the scheme intended to concentrate on the growth of certain kinds of products treating the same as "thrust sectors". In para 3.10, six such sectors are mentioned as thrust sectors, viz., Electronic hardware, Textile including garments, Auto components/ancillary, Gem and jewellery, Agriculture and service sector. It would be significant to point out that except one, all other writ Petitioners belong to Gem and jewellery sector. One writ Petitioner has export in Textile/Garments. What is highlighted is that no thrust sector was affected or prejudiced by the impugned Notification and which was primarily Gem and Jewellery exporters who got the hit. [58] and[59]

(2) As a matter of fact, immediately after the introduction of the scheme, it was found that there was unprecedented sharp rise in the export in Gem and Jewellery articles. It raised certain suspicion in the mind of the authorities as to whether these were genuine exports. The matter was investigated and on the basis of intelligence gathered by the Central Government, it was learnt that there was rampant misuse of the scheme by certain status holders. [60]

(3) The Government demonstrated that based on the exercise undertaken, Notification No. 28 as well as Public Notice No. 40 of the even date were issued. Notwithstanding strenuous efforts made by learned Counsel for the wit Petitioners to show that the exports by them were genuine and there was no misuse, the Court had no hesitation in accepting the plea of the Union that the purport behind Notifications was bona fide which was actuated with the conditions of public interest in mind. [74] and[75]

(4) Sub-note (ii) of Note 1 now provides that export turnover of units pertaining to SEZ/EOU/EHTP/STP or products manufactured by them and exported through DTA units are not to be included and taken into account for the purpose of calculating the value of exports. Both the High Courts in the impugned judgments have held it to be clarificatory on the ground that such export turnover was excluded as these units, namely, those pertaining to SEZ/EOU/EHTP/STP schemes are getting all facilities for import without payment of duty on various types of goods including capital goods required by them for their activities and there was no intention in the original scheme also to confer double benefit under para 3.7.2.1. [83]

(5) It is difficult to accept the submission of the learned Counsel appearing for the Writ Petitioners that Note 1 which stipulated that such exports would not be counted for the purpose of entitlement was not clarificatory but an amendment to the scheme. No doubt, such EOU/EHTP/STP schemes are allowed to export goods manufactured by them through a merchant exporter/status holder recognised under the EXIM Policy. Likewise, SEZ is also authorised to export its goods through a status holder. The permission to make exports through status holder is one thing. Taking into account these exports by the status holders for the purpose of calculating the value of exports for availing the benefits of the entitlement given under the scheme is altogether different thing. The counsel for the Petitioners could not refute or deny that such SEZ/EOU//EHTP/STP are getting the benefit of the exports made by them in the form of facilities for import without payment of duty on various types of goods including capital goods required by them for their activities. [83]

(6) Therefore, exactly the same benefit which is sought to be given to the status holders for achieving incremental growth as provided in the scheme was already conferred upon. Obviously, purpose of the scheme was not to give double benefit for same exports. In fact, if that is allowed, it would be a clear case of misuse of the scheme inasmuch as for the same export turnover units operating under SEZ/EOU/EHTP/STP would get the certain incentives and the status holders also manage to extract the same benefits exploiting the scheme by exporting the goods manufactured by these STZ/EOU etc. On considering the issue in this hue, the Court agreed with the opinion of the High Court that such a sub-note (ii) was merely clarificatory in nature. [83]

(7) Sub-note (v) to Note 1 stipulates that if the supply were made by one status holder to another status holder, these shall also be excluded while calculating the value of exports. Likewise, sub-note (vi) of Note 1 excludes the export performance made by one status holder on behalf of other status holder. High Courts have treated it as clarificatory on the ground that the Scheme was not intended to encourage the status holders/export house to pool the exports made by other exporters for the purpose of showing incremental growth in the exports and, therefore, the addition of sub-note (v) to Note 1 was in consonance with the basic objective of the scheme as originally envisaged. Having regard to the nature of this sub-note (v) and when the Court kept in mind the fact that the two status-holders if they carry out the exports and made the target as per the Scheme were entitled to the benefit of the Scheme, the Court agreed with the High Courts that even insertion of these clauses is clarificatory in nature inasmuch as it only states that the supply made by one status-holder to another status-holder will not be counted. [84]

(8) Section 5 provides that the Central Government may, from time to time, formulate and announce, the EXIM Policy. This has to be done by issuing/announcing this Policy by way of notification in the Official Gazette. The Central Government also has the power to amend the Policy so announced by adopting the same procedure i.e. by issuing notification in the Official Gazette. It is not in dispute that EXIM Policy in question was issued by notification in exercise of powers conferred Under Section 5 of the Act. This Policy, thus, is infested with statutory flavour. [90]

(9) For the purpose of carrying out the objectives of the Act which includes implementation of the Policy, Central Government is authorised to appoint DGFT as per Section 6 of the Act. Main functions of the DGFT are advising the Central Government in formulation of the Policy and he is also responsible for carrying out the said Policy. Sub-section (3) of Section 6 provides that Central Government may delegate its power exercisable under the Act. However, powers Under Sections 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19 are specifically excluded which means these powers cannot be delegated. Thus, power to announce the Policy and to amend the same remains with the Central Government. Likewise, power to make rules Under Section 19 which vests with the Central Government, cannot be delegated. [91]

(10) The question, however, is as to whether by this Public Notice, DGFT was only carrying out the EXIM Policy or this Public Notice amounted to change in the said EXIM Policy. It is crystal clear that the Public Notice alters the provisions of EXIM Policy. It would, therefore, amount to amending the EXIM Policy, whether clarificatory or otherwise. There may be a valid justification and rational for exclusion of four items contained therein, as pleaded by the Union. However, it had to be done in accordance with law. When the DGFT had no power in this behalf, he could not have excluded such items from the purview of EXIM Policy by means of Public Notice. The power of DGFT is only to be exercised for procedural purposes and both the High Courts have rightly remarked that para 3.2.6 inserted by public notice goes beyond the procedural conditions. [94]

(11) In fact, the Government itself realised the same, namely, the DGFT had no such power. It is for this reason that what was sought to be achieved by the said Public Notice, was formalised by the Central Government by issuing Notifications dated April 21 and 23, 2004 in exercise of powers conferred on the Central Government by Section 5 of the Act and the same four items were excluded. Therefore, the Court held that the Public Notice No. 40 dated January 28, 2004 issued by DGFT, so far it excludes the four items, is ultra vires.95,96

The Notification No. 38 dated April 21, 2004 is not clarificatory in nature unlike Notification dated January 28, 2004. Therefore, the issue of retrospectivity becomes important. The Court stated at the outset that the incentive scheme in question, as promulgated by the Government, is in the nature of concession or incentive which is a privilege of the Central Government. It is for the Government to take the decision to grant such a privilege or not. It is also trite law that such exemptions, concessions or incentives can be withdrawn any time. All these are matters which are in the domain of policy decisions of the Government. When there is withdrawal of such incentive and it is also shown that the same was done in public interest, the Court would not tinker with these policy decisions. This is so laid down by catena of judgments of this Court and is now treated as established and well grounded principle of law. In such circumstances, even the Doctrine of Promissory Estoppel cannot be ignored. [100] and[101]

(12) It cannot be denied that the Government has a right to amend, modify or even rescind a particular Scheme. It is well settled that in complex economic matters every decision is necessarily empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one may call trial and error method and therefore its validity cannot be tested on any rigid prior considerations or on the application of any straight-jacket formula. [104]

The Court, in the first instance, made the legal position clear that a delegated or subordinate legislation can only be prospective and not retrospective, unless rule making authority has been vested with power under a statute to make rules with retrospective effect. In the present case, Section 5 of the Act does not give any such power specifically to the Central Government to make rules retrospective. No doubt, this Section confer powers upon the Central Government to 'amend' the policy which has been framed under the aforesaid provisions. However, that by itself would not mean that such a provision empowers the Government to do so retrospective. This legal position is rightly discussed by the Bombay High Court in the impugned judgment. [108]

(13) The effect of the aforesaid discussion would be that if the Status Holders had achieved 25% incremental growth in exports, they acquired the right to receive the benefit under the Scheme, which could not be taken away. The pertinent and crucial question is as to whether these exporters/writ Petitioners acquired any such right? This issue would be inter-twined with other related issue, namely, whether the notification has retroactive operation or it is retrospective in nature. Both these aspects are to be dealt with simultaneously in order to provide suitable and right answer to the question posed. An astute and penetrative examination of the record, with reference to the results of the investigation, which had prompted the Central Government to issue these Notifications, provides a very tidy answer to the question posed above is that the so-called targets achieved were only on paper through fraudulent means and, therefore, it cannot be said that any vested right accrued in favour of these exporters. [109],[110] and[111]

(14) The inquiry conducted by the Government revealed that there were exports of rough diamonds even though India is not a rough diamond producing country. These exports stopped the moment DFCE benefits in respect of rough diamond were disallowed. It was also found that cut and polished diamonds were imported, stored inside a bond and re-exported with artificial value addition. Many of these exporters exported to their own counterparts in Dubai and Sharjah and when this consignments reached those destinations, they were declared as scrap to avoid import duty. [112]

(15) In such a scenario, a sagacious approach with practical sense lead the Court to conclude that these writ Petitioners/exporters had actually achieved the targets set down in the original Scheme and thereby acquired any "vested right". It was pernicious and blatant misuse of the provisions of the Scheme and periscopic viewing thereof establishes the same. Thus, the impugned decision reflected in the notifications dated April 21 and 23, 2004, did not take away any vested right of these exporters and amendments were necessitated by over-whelming public interest/considerations to prevent the misuse of the Scheme.114

(16) Therefore, the Court is of the opinion that even when impugned Notification issued Under Section 5 could not be retrospective in nature, such retrospectivity have not deprived the writ Petitioners/exporters of their right inasmuch as no right had accrued in favour of such persons under the Scheme. This Court, or for that matter the High Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction, cannot come to the aid of such Petitioners/exporters who, without making actual exports, play with the provisions of the Scheme and try to take undue advantage thereof. To this extent, direction of the Bombay High Court granting these exporters benefit of the Scheme for the past period is set aside. [114]

The exporters are right in their submission that fee could not be imposed by a Public Notice and it was necessary to have recourse to Section 5 of the Act to impose such a fee. Notification dated July 24, 2003 insofar as it relates to imposition of fee is, therefore, set aside. [115]

(17) Section 5 of the Act does not empower the Government to make amendments with retrospective effect, thereby taking away the rights which have already accrued in favour of the exporters under the Scheme. No doubt, the Government has, otherwise, power to amend, modify or withdraw a particular Scheme which gives benefits to a particular category of persons under the said Scheme. At the same time, if some vested right has accrued in favour of the beneficiaries who achieved the target stipulated in the Scheme and thereby became eligible for grant of duty credit entitlement, that cannot be snatched from such persons/exporters by making the amendment retrospectively. In the present case, the Court finds that Section 5 of the Act does not give any specific power to the Central Government to make the Rules with retrospective effect. The Central Government is authorised to make Rules/Schemes under the said provision as a delegatee, which means that the EXIM Policy/Scheme framed under the said provision is by way of delegated legislation. There has to be specific power to make the amendments with retrospective effect, which are lacking in the instant case. Moreover, even if there is such a power, it cannot take away vested rights which have accrued in favour of particular persons/exporters.128

(18) TPS, which was introduced in EXIM Policy 2004-2009 on August 31, 2004, adopted some of the features of the earlier Schemes in the EXIM Policy 2002-2007 and introduced the concept of Multi-Entitlement Rates, thus, allowing higher entitlement rates for higher growth. The Multi-Entitlement Rates depended upon the quantum of incremental growth achieved by particular exporters. Vide Notification No. 32/2005 dated April 08, 2005, the Central Government amended para 3.7.8 and instead of three rates of entitlement based on growth, it prescribed one single rate, i.e. 5% of the incremental growth. The Scheme was floated to accelerate quantum growth in exports and when those star export houses achieved the quantum growth in exports, as stated in para 3.7.3, they would naturally become entitled to a particular percentage of duty credit entitlement depending upon the quantum of growth achieved. These exporters, thus, got vested right to avail the duty credit entitlement and achieve higher rate, i.e. 10% or 15%, as the case may be. Reducing the same to 5% would clearly amount to taking away their vested right with the issuing of the Notification and making them effective retrospectively. [130],[131] and[132]

(19) Likewise, no cogent explanation is coming forward for adding four items by amending para 3.7.5 vide Notification No. 48 (RE 2005)/2004-2009 dated February 20, 2006. The only argument advanced at the time of hearing was that the Government felt that benefit of TPS should not be extended to the exporters of these items. That may be a policy decision and the Government is empowered to take such a decision. If the Government realised afterwards that export of these items should not have been given the benefit of TPS and extending the benefit to now excluded items was an ill-considered move, though the Central Government was free to withdraw it in respect of such items but it could do so only prospectively, but was not entitled to do so with effect from the back date, i.e. April 01, 2005, by taking away the vested right that had already accrued in favour of exporters of these items. As a result, the Court held that Notification No. 48/2005 dated February 20, 2006 and Notification No. 8/2006 dated June 12, 2006 cannot be applied retrospectively and they would be effective only from the dates they were issued. [134]

Referred Notifications:
MANU/DGFT/0018/2004, MANU/DGFT/0049/2004, MANU/DGFT/0050/2004, MANU/DGFT/0034/2002, MANU/CUST/0077/2000, MANU/CUCR/0113/2003, MANU/DGFT/0021/2003, MANU/DGFT/0109/2006, MANU/CUST/0063/2005, MANU/DGFT/0035/2006
JUDGMENT
A.K. Sikri, J.
Civil Appeal No. 554 of 2006
Civil Appeal No. 658 of 2006
Civil Appeal No. 1587 of 2006
Civil Appeal No. 1589 of 2006
Transfer Case (Civil) No. 36 of 2007
Transfer Case (Civil) No. 1 of 2008
Transfer Case (Civil) No. 3 of 2008
Transfer Case (Civil) No. 49 of 2009
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 343 of 2009
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 246 of 2010
1. Export Import (EXIM) Policy 2002-2007 was framed by the Central Government Under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act'), which came into force with effect from April 01, 2003. The main purpose and objective of this Policy was to boost the exports. In furtherance of the same, a Special Scheme containing the provisions thereof was incorporated therein which gave certain kind of incentives to the exporters of some specified items. However, some amendments were made thereto vide Notification No. 28 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated January 28, 2004. On the same day, Public Notice No. 40(RE-2003)/2002-2007 was also issued in exercise of powers conferred under the provisions of Para 2.4 of the said Policy, which was followed by Notification No. 38 : MANU/DGFT/0049/2004 dated April 21, 2004 and Notification No. 40 : MANU/DGFT/0050/2004 dated April 23, 2004.
2. Vide Notification No. 28 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated January 28, 2004, the Central Government sought to amend certain provisions of the EXIM Policy by inserting Notes 1 to 5, which was unpalatable to the exporters of the goods mentioned therein as, according to them, under the guise of the said Notes, some benefits which had already accrued to these exporters under the EXIM Policy were taken away. Vide Public Notice dated January 28, 2004, the Government announced exclusion of export performance in relation to four classes of goods mentioned in para 2 thereof from computation of the entitlement under the Scheme and, at the same time, sought to disallow the import of agricultural products falling under Chapters I to XXIV of ITC (HS) under the said scheme. Thereafter, Notification No. 38 : MANU/DGFT/0049/2004 dated April 21, 2004 was published Under Section 5 of the Act on the same lines on which Public Notice dated January 28, 2004 was issued. The exporters of these goods, naturally, felt aggrieved thereby. There was an innocuous amendment to Notification No. 38 : MANU/DGFT/0049/2004 dated April 21, 2004 wherein in addition to the Director General of Foreign Trade (for short, 'DGFT') as an Officer to enforce these Notifications, ex-officio Additional Secretary to the Government of India was also added. All such exporters who were affected thereby filed writ petitions in various High Courts, particulars whereof shall be taken note of hereinafter at the appropriate stage.
3. The Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No. 2397 of 2004, decided on July 04, 2005, has given partial relief to the exporters/writ Petitioners. The Gujarat High Court has substantially affirmed the validity of these Notifications while giving relief on one particular aspect. Insofar as judgments of Bombay High Court and Gujarat High Court are concerned, both the Union of India as well as the writ Petitioners preferred Special Leave Petitions, in which leave was granted, and these are now converted as Civil Appeal No. 658 of 2006 and Civil Appeal 554 of 2006 respectively. That apart, the Single Judge of the Gujarat High Court in one of the cases dismissed the writ petition and the LPA was filed by the said Petitioner before the Division Bench of the High Court. Since the issue involved in these appeals is the same, which is raised in the LPA in the Gujarat High Court and still pending in the writ petitions filed in various High Courts, transfer petitions were filed by the Union of India seeking transfer of all those cases and to be heard along with these two appeals. Those transfer petitions were allowed. This is how all these cases are bunched together and heard simultaneously as the issue is substantially the same in all these matters.
4. With this background reflecting the nature of these cases, we now proceed to discuss the main provision of the EXIM Policy and how the aforesaid Notifications have amended the provisions of that Policy. That would give an indication as to what kind of grievance is raised by these exporters in challenging the validity of these Notifications.
5. The Act was passed to provide for the development and Regulation of foreign trade by facilitating imports into, and augmenting exports from India and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of this Act stipulates that foreign trade is the driving force of economic activity. Technology, investment and production are becoming increasingly interdependent upon each other and foreign trade brings these elements together and spurs economic growth. The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 was made in different circumstances. Although it has been amended from time to time, the Act does not provide an adequate legal framework for the development and promotion of India's foreign trade. Besides, in July, 1991 and August, 1991, major changes in trade policy were made by the Government of India. The goals of the new trade policy are to increase productivity and competitiveness and to achieve a strong export performance. The Exports and Import Policy is a vital part of trade policy. The basic law governing foreign trade must serve as an instrument to create an environment that will provide a strong impetus to exports, facilitate imports and render export activity more profitable. It has, therefore, been considered necessary to enact a new law repealing the existing law. The Act intends to achieve these objectives.
6. In order to achieve the aforesaid objectives, power is given to the Central Government Under Section 3 of the Act to make provisions relating to imports and exports with primary focus on the development and Regulation of foreign trade. Further, Section 5 specifically empowers the Central Government to formulate and announce the EXIM Policy. It reads as under:
5. Export and import policy. - The Central Government may, from time to time, formulate and announce, by notification in the Official Gazette, the export and import policy and may also, in the like manner, amend that policy.
7. In order to carry out the purposes of this Act, DGFT is to be appointed by the Central Government as per the provisions of Section 6 of the Act. In addition to carrying out the purposes of this Act, DGFT is also supposed to advise the Central Government in formulation of the EXIM Policy. He is also made responsible for carrying out that Policy. However, Sub-section (3) of Section 6 empowers the Central Government to give the aforesaid functions of the DGFT even to other Officer subordinate to DGFT, except for powers conferred Under Sections 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19 of the Act.
8. As already noted above, Sections 3 and 5 give certain powers to the Central Government and, therefore, these powers have to be exercised by the Central Government only and cannot be delegated to DGFT or an Officer subordinate to him. Sections 15 and 16 relate to appeal and revision which can be filed against the orders passed by the Adjudicating Authority against any person committing contravention of provisions of the Act, Rules, Orders and EXIM Policy. Appeal lies to DGFT if the Adjudicating Authority, who passes the order, is an Officer subordinate to DGFT. In those cases, where the Adjudicating Officer is DGFT himself, appeal lies to the Central Government. Under Sections 16, revisionary powers are conferred upon the Central Government. These powers of appeal and revision also cannot be delegated by virtue of Section 6(3) of the Act. Section 19 again confers power upon the Central Government to make Rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act generally and in respect of various matters specifically enumerated in Sub-section (2) of Section 19. This power of the Central Government also cannot be delegated.
9. It may be noted that Under Section 5 of the Act, the Central Government has been formulating EXIM Policies from time to time. The Policy with which we are concerned is the EXIM Policy for the period 2002-2007, which was substituted by EXIM Policy 2004-2009.
10. EXIM Policy of 2002-2007 was announced and came into force from April 01, 2002. Amendment to this Policy was notified on March 31, 2003 and the revised edition of the Policy was to come into force from April 01, 2003. Even though the Central Government is generally entitled and empowered to carry out amendments in this Policy from time to time, in the EXIM Policy 2002-2007, such a right was specifically reserved stating that 'however, the Central Government reserves the right in public interest to make any amendments to this Policy in exercise of powers conferred by Section 5 of the Act'. It was also mentioned that such amendments would be made by means of a notification published in the Gazette of India.
11. Chapter I of the Policy, which gives 'Introduction', had made transitional arrangements vide para 1.2 thereof clarifying that any notifications made or public notices issued or anything done under the provisions of EXIM Policy and in force immediately before the commencement of the said Policy shall continue to be in force, insofar as those notifications, etc. are not in consistent with the provisions of the instant Policy. It was also clarified that licences/certificates/permissions issued under the earlier Policy would continue to be followed for the purpose for which such licences/certificates/permissions were issued, unless otherwise stipulated. Para 1.4 enshrines the objectives which led to formulation of such a Policy and reads as under:
1.4 The principal objectives of this Policy are:
(i) To facilitate sustained growth in exports to attain a share of at least 1% of global merchandise trade.
(ii) To stimulate sustained economic growth by providing access to essential raw materials, intermediates, components, consumables and capital goods required for augmenting production and providing services.
(iii) To enhance the technological strength and efficiency of Indian agriculture, industry and services, thereby improving their competitive strength while generating new employment opportunities, and to encourage the attainment of internationally accepted standards of quality.
(iv) To provide consumers with good quality goods and services at internationally competitive prices while at the same time creating a level playing field for the domestic producers.
12. Keeping in mind the aforesaid principal objectives, para 2.1 made it clear that exports and imports shall be free, except in cases where they are regulated by the provisions of the said Policy or any other law for the time being in force. As per para 2.4, DGFT was authorised to specify the procedure which needs to be followed by an exporter or importer or by any licencee or other competent authority for the purposes of implementing the provisions of the Act, the Rules and the Orders made therein and this Policy. Such a procedure was to be stipulated and included in the Handbook (Volume-I), Handbook (Volume-II), Schedule of DEPB and in ITC (HS) and published by means of a public notice. It was permissible to amend this procedure from time to time.
13. Another provision of this Policy which needs to be noticed is para 2.34 that pertains to 'third party exports' and reads as under:
2.34 Third party exports, as defined in paragraph 9.55 shall be allowed under the Policy.
14. Since the third party exports are to be allowed, as defined in para 9.55, we reproduce herein the said para as well:
"Third-party exports" means exports made by an exporter or manufacturer on behalf of another exporter(s). In such cases, shipping bills shall indicate the name of both the exporter/manufacturer and exporter(s).
15. Registration by importer or exporter is needed to avail the benefits of this Policy and provision in this respect is contained in para 2.44 mentioning about the Registration-cum-Membership Certificate, which reads as under:
2.44 Any person, applying for (i) a licence/certificate/permission to import/export, [except items listed as restricted items in ITC (HS)] or (ii) any other benefit or concession under this policy shall be required to furnish Registration-cum-Membership Certificate (RCMC) granted by the competent authority in accordance with the procedure specified in the Handbook (Vol. I) unless specifically exempted under the Policy.
16. Chapter III of the EXIM Policy deals with 'Promotional Measures' which are to be undertaken to achieve the objective of the Policy. Apart from various other measures stipulated therein, with which we are not concerned, this Chapter also deals with grant of 'Status Certificate' which is to be given to various kinds of exporters etc. who are eligible for such recognition. Categories of the exporters are mentioned therein depending upon the export performance level achieved by such export houses. Such status holders are eligible for certain special facilities which could be availed during the validity period of the Policy, i.e. April 01, 2002 to March 31, 2007, unless otherwise specified. Since all the Petitioners who filed the writ petitions have this Status Certificate, on the strength of which they are claiming the special facilities, and in their perspective the impugned notifications adversely affect the availment of these facilities, we reproduce verbatim concerned paras of the Policy touching upon this aspect:

We now advert to the most crucial provision which entitles these Status Holders to the following benefits:
The exporters who gets the Status Certificate are known as 'Status Holders'. The term 'Status Holder' is defined in para 9.53 and reads as under:
"Status Holder" means an exporter recognised as "Export House/Trading House by DGFT/Development Commissioner or Star Trading House/Super Star Trading House" by the Director General of Foreign Trade.
17. As noted above, the main objective of this EXIM Policy was to achieve the share of 1% of global trade and accelerated growth in exports. For this purpose, certain sectors, where such exports were to be given the necessary boost, were mentioned in para 3.10 describing them as 'Thrust Sector'. These are as under:
3.10 With a view to achieve the share of 1% of global trade and accelerated growth in exports, the following shall be the thrust sectors:
a) Electronic hardware
b) Textile including garments
c) Auto components/ancillary
d) Gem & Jewellery
e) Agriculture
f) Service sector
Department of Commerce shall take concerted efforts to promote exports of these sectors by specific sectoral strategy.
18. It is already noted above in para 3.7.1 that various kinds of categories are eligible for recognition as status holders. These include Export Oriented Units (EOUs), Electronic Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs) and Software Technology Parks (STPs). A separate Chapter, i.e. Chapter VI, is carved out to deal with the aforesaid categories. Eligibility thereof is stipulated in para 6.1, which is to the following effect:
19. Such EOUs/EHTPs/STPs are permitted to export goods through status holder, as specifically provided in para 6.10 and we reproduce hereunder:
20. Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are also entitled for Status Certificate. The provisions concerning these SEZs are contained in Chapter VII of the EXIM Policy. Their eligibility is defined in para 7.1 in the following words:
21. Para 7.8 deals with DTA Sales and Supplies which these SEZ Units ma undertake. These SEZ Units are also entitled to export through status holder in terms of para 7.10, as under:
22. Chapter IX contains definition of various terms which are used in the EXIM Policy. We have already noted the definition of 'Status Holder' as well as 'Third Party Exports'. Some other definitions which require a mention are as under:
23. To put it in nutshell, EXIM Policy 2002-2007 was promulgated with the principal objective, inter alia, to facilitate sustained growth in exports to achieve a share of 1% of global merchandise trade. Therefore, the thrust of this Policy was to ensure and facilitate growth in exports. Because of this reason, exports and imports were made free, except in relation to cases where they were specifically regulated by the provisions of this Policy or under any law. In order to facilitate the growth of these exports, following measures were specifically provided in the EXIM Policy:
(a) third party exports;
(b) stipulating thrust sector, viz. mentioning those products which were having potential in achieving the target of 1% of global trade and accelerated growth in exports. It was, therefore, perceived that in these sectors there is an ample scope for boosting the exports. Six such sectors mentioned in para 3.10 include Gem and Jewellery Sector as well;
(c) it was held that growth in exports can be accelerated through small scale industry sector/mid level export houses. For this purpose, depending upon the level of export by the exporters, categories of the exporters were carved out, namely, Export Houses, Trading Houses, Star Trading Houses and Super Star Trading Houses. In order to encourage these export categories, depending upon their category, the export incentives were provided for them;
(d) in the same direction, certain categories were chosen for giving recognition as status holders, who could get such Status Certificate if they come within the purview of the definition of 'Status Holder' contained in para 9.55.
24. The importance that was given to these status holders was highlighted by the then Commerce Minister while announcing special strategic package for status holders. Relevant extract of the said speech contained in para 19 thereof is noted as under:
19. The status holders have been a pillar of strength in increasing exports. There is a feeling among them that under the Exim Policy, substantive benefits are no longer available to them since the earlier benefits such as fast track clearance and relaxation from certain procedures, are now universally applicable in the liberalized environment. We recognize that the status holders will continue to play a significant and increasing role in boosting exports, particularly from the small scale sector, as most of the small scale units will not be in a position to directly access the international markets. Moreover, it will be our endeavor to facilitate India emerging as a major base for outsourcing products and services for the rest of the world. They are also critical to our strategy for accelerating the rate of incremental growth of exports. Therefore, we intend to give a premium to the status holders who achieve high growth rate in their exports. It is proposed to give a duty free entitlement to them for import of capital goods, spares, office equipments and consumables. This will be available to status holders who achieve a growth rate of 25% or more in the current year with a minimum export performance of Rs. 25 crore. They would be entitled to a duty free entitlement of 10% of the incremental growth in exports during the current financial year. This entitlement would be subject to actual user condition which can be passed on to associate manufacturers.
25. In fact, as a part of the EXIM Policy, with amendment coming into effect from April 01, 2003, certain incentives known as 'Special Strategic Package' for status holders was incorporated in para 3.7.2.1. We are concerned with sub-para (vi) thereof, which granted duty free entitlement of 10% of the incremental growth in exports. This para is reproduced above. A reading of the said para would demonstrate that in order to have the aforesaid entitlement, following conditions were to be satisfied:
(a) the exporter had to be 'Status Holder';
(b) achieving incremental growth of more than 25% in FOB value of exports in free foreign exchange;
(c) minimum export turnover of ` 25 crores in free foreign exchange;
(d) entitlement could be used for import of capital goods, office equipment and inputs for their own factory or the factory of the associate/supporting manufacturer/job worker;
(e) such entitlement/goods was non-transferable; and
(f) since the Scheme was intended to be a specific incentive for fast growing status holders, the benefits were to be available only after April 01, 2004 on the basis of the export performance during the period April 01, 2003 to March 31, 2004.
26. On the very same day, i.e. on March 31, 2003, in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 5 of the Act, read with para 1.1 of the EXIM Policy 2002-2007, the Central Government amended and notified the EXIM Policy 2002-2007 (revised edition: March 2003). The revised edition came into force with effect from April 01, 2003. The relevant provisions of the EXIM Policy, as amended upto March 31, 2003, and relevant for the purpose of the present case, are paras 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.6, 2.8, 2.9 and 2.10 and the same are reproduced below:
1.1 In exercise of the powers conferred Under Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 ( No. 22 of 1992) the Central Government hereby notifies the Export and Import Policy for the period 2002-2007. This Policy shall come into force with effect from 1st April 2002 and shall remain in force upto 31st March 2007 and will be co-terminus with the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-2007). However, the Central Government reserves the right in public interest to make any amendments to this Policy in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 5 of the Act. Such amendment shall be made by means of a Notification published in the Gazette of India.
1.2. Any Notifications made or Public Notices issued or anything done under the previous Export/Import policies, and in force immediately before the commencement of this Policy shall, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Policy, continue to be in force and shall be deemed to have been made, issued or done under this Policy. Licence/certificate/permissions issued before the commencement of this Policy shall continue to be valid for the purpose for which such licence/certificate/permission was issued unless otherwise stipulated.
1.3. In case an export or import that is permitted freely under this policy is subsequently subjected to any restriction or Regulation, such export or import will ordinarily be permitted notwithstanding such restriction or Regulation, unless otherwise stipulated, provided that the shipment of the export of import is made within the original validity of the irrevocable letter of credit established before the date of imposition of such restriction.
xxx
2.2. Every exporter or importer shall comply with the provisions of Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act 1992, the Rules and Orders made thereunder, the provisions of this Policy and the terms and conditions of any licence/certificate/permission granted to him, as well as provisions of any other law for the time being in force. All imported goods shall also be subject to domestic laws, rules, orders, Regulations, technical specifications, environmental and safety norms as applicable to domestically produced goods. No import or export of rough diamonds shall be permitted unless the shipment parcel is accompanied by Kiberley Process (KP) Certificate required under the procedure specified by the Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council (GJEPC).
2.3. If any question or doubt arises in respect of the interpretation of any provision contained in this Policy, or regarding the classification of any item in the ITC (HS) or Handbook (Vol. I) or Handbook (Vol. 2), or Schedule of DEPB Rate the said question of doubt shall be referred to the Director General of Foreign Trade whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.
If any question or doubt arises whether a licence/certificate/permission has been issued in accordance with this Policy or if any question or doubt arises touching upon the scope and content of such documents, the same shall be referred to the Director General of Foreign Trade whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.
2.4. The Director General of Foreign Trade may, in any case or class of cases, specify the procedure to be followed by an exporter or importer or by any licensing or any other competent authority for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the Act the Rules and the Orders made thereunder and this Policy. Such procedures shall be included in the Handbook (Vol. 1), Handbook (Vol. 2), Schedule of DEPB Rate and in ITC (HS) and published by means of a public notice. Such procedures may, in like manner, be amended from time to time.
The Handbook (Vol. 1) is a supplement to the EXIM Policy and contains relevant procedures and other details. The procedure of availing benefits under various schemes of the Policy are given in the Handbook (Vol. 1).
xxx
2.6. DGFT may, through a notification, adopt and enforce any measure necessary for:
(i) Protection of public morals.
(ii) Protection of human, animal or plant life or health.
(iii) Protection of patents, trademarks and copyrights and the prevention of deceptive practices.
(iv) Prevention of prison labour.
(v) Prevention of national treasures of artistic, historic or archaeological value.
(vi) Conservation of exhaustible natural resources.
(vii) Protection of trade of fissionable material or material from which they are derived; and
(viii) Prevention of traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war.
xxx
2.8. Every licence/certificate/permission shall be valid for the period of validity specified in the licence/certificate/permission and shall contain such terms and conditions as may be specified by the licensing authority which may include:
(a) the quantity, description and value of the goods;
(b) Actual User condition;
(c) export obligation;
(d) the value addition to be achieved; and
(e) the minimum export price.
2.9. No person may claim a licence/certificate/permission as a right and the Director General of Foreign Trade or the licensing authority shall have the power to refuse to grant or renew a licence/certificate/permission in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder.
2.10 If a licence/certificate/permission holder violates any condition of the licence/certificate/permission or fails to fulfill the export obligation, he shall be liable for action in accordance with the Act, the Rules and Orders made thereunder, the Policy and any other law for the time being in force.
27. On March 31, 2003, in exercise of the powers conferred under paragraph 2.4 of the EXIM Policy, 2002-207, the DGFT notified the Handbook of Procedures (Volume-I) (Revised Edition-March 2003) which was to come into effect with effect from April 01, 2003. Para 3.2.5 of the same provided that:
The status holders having an annual incremental growth of more than 25% in the FOB value of exports (in free foreign exchange) shall be entitled to the facility of duty free credit entitlement subject to achieving a minimum annual export turnover of Rs. 25 crore (in free foreign exchange). Such status holders shall be entitled to duty free credit entitlement certificate to the extent of 10% of the incremental growth in exports.
Accordingly, status holders who will achieve more than 25% growth in exports in the year 2003-04 (in free foreign exchange) as compared to the exports made in 2002-03 (in free foreign exchange) subject to a minimum export of Rs. 25 crore (in free foreign exchange) shall be entitled for duty free credit entitlement certificate @ 10% of the incremental growth in exports.
The duty free credit entitlement can be used for import of capital goods, office equipments and inputs provided the same is freely importable under ITC (HS). Such goods shall be non-transferable. Goods imported against such entitlement certificate shall be used by status holders or his supporting manufacturer/job worker provided the name and address of the supporting manufacturer/job worker is endorsed on the certificate issued by RLA.
Application shall be filed with the jurisdictional regional licensing authority as per the address given in status certificate. The application for the duty free credit entitlement certificate would be made in Appendix 17D.
The duty free entitlement certificate shall be valid for a period of 12 months. The status holder shall within one month of the expiry of the validity of the duty free entitlement certificate, submit a statement of imports made under the certificate as per Appendix 17E to the jurisdictional Regional Licensing Authority.
28. After taking stock of the main provisions of the EXIM Policy which concern us in these proceedings, we now advert to the nature of amendments made by Notification dated January 28, 2004 as well as Public Notice of even date, followed by Notification No. 38 : MANU/DGFT/0049/2004 dated April 21, 2004.
29. Vide Notification No. 28 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated January 28, 2004, which was issued in exercise of powers contained in Section 5 of the Act read with para 1.1 of the EXIM Policy, certain amendments were made in the EXIM Policy. However, we are concerned here with amendment in para 3.7.2.1 in Chapter III. As noted above, this para provides certain incentives and contains seven sub-paragraphs. After sub-paragraph (vii), five notes were inserted by way of amendment. Though some provisions of Note I are the bone of contention, we reproduce here all these Notes for better understanding:
Note 1 - For the purpose of calculating the value of exports, the following exports shall not be taken into account, namely:
(i) re-export of imported goods or exports made through transshipment;
(ii) export turnover of units operating under SEZ/EOU/EHTP/STP Schemes or products manufactured by them and exported through DTA units;
(iii) deemed exports (even when payments are received in free foreign exchange) and payment from EEFC account;
(iv) service exports;
(v) supplies made by one status holder to another status holder;
(vi) export performance made by one status holder on behalf of other status holder will not be eligible for entitlement under the scheme;
(vii) supplies made or export performance effected by a non-status holder (Merchant exporter/Manufacturer with any export performance in 2003-04) to a status holder if the applicant as well as the non status holder have less than 25 per cent incremental growth over their respective previous years direct export turnover; and
(viii) the exports made by an applicant within a group and the group to which it belongs has individually less than 25 per cent incremental growth of export.
Note 2 - The incremental growth of exports by an exporter shall not, directly or indirectly, be transferred to any other exporters.
Note 3 - Government reserved the right in public interest, to specify the export products, which shall not be eligible for calculation of incremental growth/entitlement. Similarly, the government may also notify the list of goods, which shall not be allowed for imports under the scheme.
Note 4 - These guidelines will be applicable to the exports made on or after 1.04.2003.
Note 5 - The entitlement will be in terms of duty credit.
To point out here itself, challenge was laid to sub-note (ii), (v), (vi) and (vii) of Note 1.
30. Sub-paragraph (3) of the para 3.8 pertaining to the "duty free credit entitlement for service providers" was amended to read as under:
Service provider (other than hotels) shall be entitled to duty free import equivalent to 10% of the average foreign exchange earned by them in preceding three licensing years. However, hotels (one star and above), heritage hotels, stand-alone restaurants approved by Department of Tourism, Govt. of India and other service providers in tourism sector registered with Department of Tourism, Govt. of India, and shall be entitled for duty free imports equivalent to 5% of the average foreign exchange earned by them in free imports equivalent to 5% of the average foreign exchange earned by them in preceding three licensing years. For one & two star hotels and stand-alone restaurants, the foreign exchange earned through international credit cards only shall be taken into account for the entitlement under the scheme. The duty free entitlement shall be used for import of any capital good including spares, office equipment(s) & professional equipment(s), office furniture(s) & consumables. However, agriculture, diary products motor cars sports utility vehicles and all purpose vehicles would not be allowed to be imported against this entitlement.
31. Vide Public Notice bearing No. 40 dated January 28, 2004, which was issued along with the aforesaid Notification No. 28 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 on the same date, certain amendments were made in the Handbook of Procedures (Volume-I). This Public Notice was issued by the DGFT in exercise of powers conferred under para 2.4 of the EXIM Policy. By this Public Notice, paragraph 3.2.6 was inserted below para 3.2.5 of the Handbook of Procedures (Volume-I), which reads as under:
The scheme will be applicable to status holders who were also status holders as on 31.3.2003 and who had achieved minimum export turnover of 25 crores in the year 2003-04:
I. For direct as well as third party exports, the Export documents viz. Export Order, Invoice, GR Form, Bank Realization Certificate should be in the name of applicant only. However, for the third party exports, where goods have been procured from a manufacturer, the shipping bill should contain the name of the exporter as well as the supporting manufacturer.
II. Goods allowed to be imported under this scheme shall have a nexus with the products exported and a declaration in this regard shall be made by the applicant in Appendix 17D.
III. The licensing authority shall at the time of issuance of the duty free credit entitlement certificate endorse the name of the associate manufacturer/supporting manufacturer/job worker on the certificate as declared by the applicant. Goods imported against such entitlement certificate shall be used by the status holder or his supporting manufacturer/job worker in proportion to the value of their direct contribution to the entitlement.
IV. The last date for filing of such applications shall be 31st December.
V. The duty free credit entitlement certificate shall be issued with a single port of registration. For each duty free credit entitlement certificate, split certificates subject to a minimum of Rs. 5 lakh each and multiples thereof may also be issued. A fee of Rs. 1000/- each shall be paid for each split certificate. However, a request for issuance of split certificate(s) shall be made at the time of application only and shall not be considered at a later stage.
VI. The duty free credit entitlement certificate shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issue. The status holder shall within one month of the last imports made under this certificate or within one month of expiry of the certificate whichever is earlier, submit a statement of imports/utilization made under the certificate as per Appendix 17E, to the jurisdictional Regional Licensing Authority who has issued the certificate with a copy to the jurisdictional excise authorities.
It also provided that:
In terms of para 3.2.5 of Handbook of Procedures (Volume 1), the following items would not be taken into account for computation of entitlement and export performance under Duty Free Credit Entitlement Scheme for Status Holders:
a) Rough, uncut and semi polished diamonds.
b) Gold, silver in any form including plain jewellery thereof.
c) Good grains sourced from central pool maintained by FCI.
d) Items exported under free shipping bills.
3. In terms of para 3.2.5 of Handbook of Procedures (Volume 1) the following items would not be allowed for imports under Duty Free Entitlement Certificate for Status Holders:
a) Agricultural products, which fall under Chapters 1-24 of ITC (HS) classification of Export and Import items.
32. We would like to mention at this stage itself that as per the Government rationale for the amendment brought out by Notification No. 28 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated 28.01.2004 and Public Notice No. 40 dated 28.01.2004 are as under:





33. M/s. Adani Export Limited, on February 07, 2004, filed S.C.A. No. 1676 of 2004 in the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad challenging the validity of the Notification No. 28 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 and Public Notice No. 40 dated January 28, 2004.
34. Thereafter, as noted above, Notification No. 38 : MANU/DGFT/0049/2004 dated April 21, 2004 was issued vide which Note 6 and 7 were inserted in para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy. It may be recalled that first five notes were inserted by Notification No. 28 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated January 28, 2004. By Note 6, certain products and category of products were excluded from entitlement under duty free entitlement certificate for status holders, whereas under Note 7, certain items were not allowed for imports under duty free entitlement certificate for status holders. These Notes read as under:
Note 6 - The export of the following products and categories of products would not be permitted for counting entitlement under the Duty Free Entitlement Certificate for Status Holders:
e) Rough, uncut and semi polished diamonds
f) Gold, silver in any form including plain jewellery thereof
g) Good grains sourced from central pool maintained by FCI
h) Items exported under free shipping bills.
Note 7 - The following items would not be allowed for imports under Duty Free Entitlement Certificate for Status Holders:
Agricultural products, which fall under Chapters 1-24 of ITC (HS) classification of Export and Import items.
Note 6 added in para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy was earlier inserted as part of para 3.2.6 in the Handbook of Procedures (Volume-I) and is subject matter of controversy.
35. On July 23, 2004, the High Court of Gujarat partly allowed Special Civil Application No. 1676 of 2004 holding that "so far as Note 6 to Para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy as inserted by the Government notifications dated April 21 and 24, 2004 and the D.G.F.T.'s public notice dated 28.01.2004 exclude the following exports from the benefit of the duty free import entitlement for the export status holders as contained in Para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy 2002-2007:
(i) Items exported under free shipping bills.
(ii) Gold, Silver in any form including plain jewellery thereof, insofar as the import of capital goods and office equipment for the factory of the associate/supporting manufacturer/job worker of the Petitioner Company is concerned.
The High Court also clarified that the exports effected by a non status holder (without any export performance in the year previous to 2003-04) are eligible for the benefits under the Special Scheme irrespective of the fact that such exporters did not have any incremental growth in exports, for obvious reason that they had made no exports in the previous years, in the first place.
36. Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the High Court of Gujarat in Special Civil Application No. 1676 of 2004, M/s. Adani Exports on October 30, 2004 filed Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. ..CC 6638 of 2005.
37. On April 07, 2005 in exercise of the powers conferred under paragraph 2.4 of the Export & Import Policy 2002-2007, the Director General of Foreign Trade amended the first three lines of Para 3.2.6 of the Handbook of Procedures. The amended provision provided that:
The scheme will be applicable to the status holders/star export houses who have achieved a minimum export turnover of Rs. 25 crores in the year 2003-2004.
It also replaced the earlier appendix 17D prescribing the application format for claiming the Duty Free Credit Entitlement.
38. On July 04, 2005 Writ Petition No. 2397 of 2004 filed by M/s. Kanak Exports before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay challenging the Notification No. 28(RE-2003)/2002-2007 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated January 28, 2004, Public Notice No. 40(RE-2003)/2002-2007, Notification No. 38 (RE-2003) 2002-2007 : MANU/DGFT/0049/2004, came up for hearing before a Division Bench of High Court and upon hearing the parties, the High Court of Judicature at Bombay upheld the validity of Notification No. 28(RE-2003)/2002-2007 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated January 28, 2004. However, it set aside the Public Notice No. 40 dated January 28, 2004 and further held that the Notifications dated April 21 and 23, 2004 have only prospective operation which means that exports made by the exporters Respondent prior to April 21, 2004 in respect of the classes of goods covered by Notifications dated April 21/23, 2004 were entitled to be computed for the purposes of determining the entitlement of Duty Free Imports.
39. On October 21, 2005, this Court issued notice on the Special Leave Petition as well as on application for condonation of delay in the Special Leave Petition (C) (CC No. 6638 of 2005) filed by M/s. Adani Export Ltd.
40. On December 13, 2005, aggrieved by the order of Bombay High Court dated July 04, 2005 in W.P. No. 2397 of 2004 upholding the validity of the Notification No. 28 of 2004 : MANU/DGFT/0018/2004 dated January 28, 2004, M/s. Kanak Exports filed Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 26123 of 2005.
41. Aggrieved by the order of the Bombay High Court dated July 04, 2005 in Writ Petition No. 2397 of 2004, the Appellant/Union of India and DGFT filed Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 1331 of 2006.
42. On January 13, 2006 Special Leave Petition (C) No. 26123 of 2005 filed by M/s. Kanak Exports and Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 1331 of 2006 filed by the Appellants/Union of India and DGFT challenging the order of the Bombay High Court dated July 04, 2005 in W.P. (C) No. 2397 of 2004 came up for hearing before this Court.
This Court upon hearing the parties granted leave in the Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1331 of 2006 and in the meantime stayed the operation of the impugned order in Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 1331 of 2006.
43. On February 17, 2006, the Union of India and DGFT aggrieved by the judgment and order of the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Special Civil Application No. 1676 of 2004 dated July 23, 2004 filed the Special Leave Petition.
44. The High Court of Gujarat, in the lead case Adani Exports Ltd. and Anr. v. Union of India and Anr. Special Civil Application No. 1676 of 2004, had rendered its judgment on July 23, 2004, which was available with the High Court of Bombay when it gave its decision on July 04, 2005. Insofar as the Gujarat High Court is concerned, it partly allowed the petition quashing Public Notice dated January 28, 2004 and Note 6 to Para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy, as inserted by the Government Notifications dated April 21 and 23, 2004 and rejected the challenge on all other counts. The Bombay High Court substantially followed the same line of action, except differing with the Gujarat High Court to a limited extent thereby granting some more relief to these Petitioners. Since these two judgments are the subject matter of these appeals, it would be apposite to scan through these judgments to find out what actually is decided by the two High Courts and the reasons in support of their respective decisions.
45. JUDGMENT OF THE GUJARAT HIGH COURT
In the Special Civil Application filed by Adani Exports Limited in the Gujarat High Court challenge was laid to the amendment to para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy vide Notification dated January 28, 2004 whereby five Notes were inserted. It also challenged insertion of Note 6 vide Notification dated April 21, 2004 read with Notification dated April 23, 2004 and Public Notice dated January 28, 2004 issued by the DGFT. The validity of the aforesaid provisions was questioned on the following premise:
(i) Since Note 4 provided that the guidelines would be applicable to exports made on or after April 01, 2003, Notification was challenged on the ground that it amounted to giving retrospective effect to the amendment Notification dated January 28, 2004 and there was no such power with the Central Government Under Section 5 of the Act, or otherwise, to make amendments to the EXIM Policy with retrospective effect, or even retroactively.
(ii) These Notes, particularly Notes 1 to 3, 6 and 7, added by the impugned Notifications were not mere guidelines or clarificatory in nature, but amounted to making substantial changes by inserting new conditions under the cover of clarification, which was not permissible.
(iii) Note 4 was also violative of the Petitioners fundamental rights Under Article 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
(iv) Doctrine of Promissory Estoppel was also invoked by contending that acting upon the EXIM Policy, which came into effect from April 01, 2003, the Petitioners had exported the goods on the promise and assurance contained in sub-para (vi) of Para 3.7.2.1 of the EXIM Policy and fulfilled the conditions set out therein, thereby achieving the target of incremental exports stipulated in the said para and, thus, became entitled to the benefit conferred therein, namely, 10% duty free imports of the specified items. The Petitioner had, therefore, altered its position and the Respondents were estopped from going back on their promises and assurances.
(v) Insofar as Public Notice dated January 28, 2004 is concerned, paragraphs 2 and 3, whereby certain items of goods which were exported were excluded from the purview of the special scheme, were challenged on the ground that they were ultra vires the powers of the DGFT as it amounted to usurping the power of the Central Government.
(vi) Insofar as Notification dated January 28, 2004 read with Notifications dated April 21 and 23, 2004 is concerned, challenge laid thereon was on the ground that they could not be made effective retrospectively.
46. The stand of the Union of India/Respondents was that Notification dated January 28, 2004 was only clarificatory in nature. Detailed justification for laying down these 'clarifications' were given stating that large number of representations were received from Trade Associations/Export Promotion Councils as well as individual exporters seeking clarification on various points relating to the implementation of the Scheme. At the same time, the Government had also received information that many exporters were trying to misuse the same and details thereof, including the investigation/inquiry that followed, were also given and all this necessitated issuance of Notification dated January 28, 2004, in public interest. Other arguments of the Petitioners were also refuted giving various justifications. It was also emphasized that Section 5 of the Act and para 1.1 of the EXIM Policy reserved the right of the Government to amend the Policy in public interest. It was argued that a statutory power to amend the Policy, after noticing the misuse of the Policy, for the purpose for which it was never intended, cannot be frustrated on the plea that the Petitioners had a legitimate expectation that they can continue to exploit the Policy for a purpose totally different from the one for which it was intended and then expect that the Government would not take any action whatsoever. It was argued that the writ Court would not sit in appeal over the wisdom of the Government in such economic matters and the Government must have the freedom to experiment and must be allowed to adopt the "trial and error method". It was also argued that economic decision, as contained in the Notifications granting monetary benefits, can be withdrawn even before the expiry of the period for which the benefit was originally given if the decision of the Government is based on relevant material justifying such clarification or even change of the Policy.
47. After taking note of the aforesaid submissions of both the parties, the High Court stated certain legal principles referring to few judgments of this Court, which it deemed necessary to bear in mind, as they reflected the caveat sounded in those judgments. In this behalf, it quoted the following passage from the judgment of this Court in State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors. v. Nandlal Jaiswal and Ors. MANU/SC/0034/1986 : (1986) 4 SCC 566, which guides as to how the Courts have to deal how with the challenge to a policy decision of the Government in economic matters:
34...We had occasion to consider the scope of interference by the Court Under Article 14 while dealing with laws relating to economic activities in R.K. Garg v. Union of India [MANU/SC/0074/1981 : (1981) 4 SCC 675]. We pointed out in that case that laws relating to economic activities should be viewed with greater latitude than laws touching civil rights such as freedom of speech, religion, etc. We observed that the legislature should be allowed some play in the joints because it has to deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution through any doctrinaire or strait-jacket formula and this is particularly true in case of legislation dealing with economic matters, where, having regard to the nature of the problems required to be dealt with, greater play in the joints has to be allowed to the legislature. We quoted with approval the following admonition give by Frankfurter, J. in Morey v. Doud [354 US 457]:
In the utilities, tax and economic Regulation cases, there are good reasons for judicial self-restraint if not judicial deference to legislative judgment. The legislature after all has the affirmative responsibility. The courts have only the power to destroy, not to reconstruct. When these are added to the complexity of economic Regulation, the uncertainty, the liability to error, the bewildering conflict of the experts, and the number of times the judges have been overruled by events-self-limitation can be seen to be the path to judicial wisdom and institutional prestige and stability.