MANU/SC/1226/2011
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
W.P. (C) No. 631 of 2004
Decided On: 22.09.2011
Appellants: Environmental and Consumer Protect Found
Vs.
Respondent: Delhi Administration and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dalveer Bhandari and Deepak Verma, JJ.
Subject: Education
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
JUDGMENT
1. Office Report dated 21st September, 2011 indicates that in pursuance of the directions of this Court, almost all the States and Union Territories have filed their affidavits, except the States of Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. It is indeed unfortunate that this Court's orders are not taken seriously by the States of Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. This Court on 9th August, 2011 passed the following order:
By order dated 29th April, 2011, this Court directed that basic facility of potable drinking water be made available to all the schools. It is indeed unfortunate that the States of U.P., Bihar, Orissa and Jammu & Kashmir have yet not complied with that order in toto. There are many schools where there is no provision of drinking water. We direct the concerned Chief Secretaries of these States to ensure that potable drinking water is made available in all the schools of their respective States on or before 15th September, 2011 and an affidavit to that effect be filed by the Chief Secretaries of the States on or before 20th September, 2011. In case, for any reason, this facility is not provided by any State, then the concerned Secretary of that State shall remain present in Court on the next date of hearing i.e. 22.9.2011.
We also direct all the other States to file affidavits before this Court within one week informing this Court that the facility of potable drinking water has been provided in all the schools in their respective States. The affidavits would be filed by the Chief Secretaries of the States themselves or by the Administrators of the Union Territories.
2. The order passed by this Court is clear that all the States were directed to ensure that potable drinking water is made available to all the schools in their respective States on or before 15th September, 2011 and the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States were directed to file affidavits on or before 20th September, 2011.
STATE of RAJASTHAN:
3. The State of Rajasthan has neither filed an affidavit nor provided the facility of drinking water in all the schools. We fail to comprehend as to why the order of this Court passed on 9th August, 2011 was not complied with by the State of Rajasthan. At this stage, learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State of Rajasthan submits that potable drinking water facility would be provided in all the schools in the State of Rajasthan on or before 11th October, 2011. We direct the Chief Secretary to file his own affidavit to that effect on or before 11th October, 2011, failing which the Chief Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan shall remain personally present in Court on the next date of hearing.
STATE of TAMIL NADU:
4. Learned Counsel appearing for the State of Tamil Nadu submits that because of the change of the Government, he has recently been appointed counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu. He prays for two weeks' time to take instructions. We direct the State of Tamil Nadu to provide the facility of drinking water in all the schools in the State, if not already provided, on or before 11th October, 2011. An affidavit be filed by the Chief Secretary to that effect.
STATE of PUNJAB:
5. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, the State of Punjab has filed an affidavit in Court today in which it is mentioned that drinking water facility has been made available in all the Government schools in the State of Punjab.
STATE of MEGHALAYA:
6. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, the State of Meghalaya has filed an affidavit in Court today in which it is mentioned that PHE Department, Meghalaya would be able to provide safe drinking water supply to all Government/Government aided schools by September, 2012. We direct the chief Secretary to the Government of Meghalaya to file further affidavit on or before 15th October, 2011 giving therein the latest position of the schools in which drinking water facility is made available, on or before 15th October, 2011.
STATE of U.P.:
7. Shri Anup Mishra, Secretary to the Government of U.P. is present in Court. He submits that in majority of the schools, drinking water facility has been provided and in the remaining schools, it would be made available on or before 15th October, 2011. He also submits that other infrastructural facilities would also be made available in the schools by that date. We direct the State to file an affidavit on or before 15th October, 2011.
STATE of JAMMU & KASHMIR:
8. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, Ms. Naseem Lankar, Secretary, Department of Education, Jammu & Kashmir is present in Court. She assures the Court that drinking water would be provided in all the schools in the State of Jammu & Kashmir by 31st October, 2011.
STATE of MADHYA PRADESH:
9. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, an affidavit has been filed by the State of Madhya Pradesh in which it is mentioned that facility of drinking water has been extended to all the Government schools in the State. Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, Learned Counsel appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh prays for time to file further affidavit. Let an affidavit be filed on or before 15th October, 2011 also indicating therein other infrastructural facilities which have been augmented in the schools in pursuance of the directions of this Court passed from time to time.
STATE of BIHAR:
10. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, the Chief Secretary, Government of Bihar has filed an affidavit in which it is indicated that drinking water facility has been made available in all the schools in the State of Bihar. He is directed to file a further affidavit indicating about the other infrastructural facilities, on or before 15th October, 2011.
STATE of WEST BENGAL:
11. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, the Chief Secretary, Government of West Bengal has filed an affidavit in which it is mentioned that drinking water facility has been made available in all the primary and upper primary schools in all the 19 districts of the State, excepting Darjeeling. Learned Counsel for the State of West Bengal submits that drinking water facility would be provided in all the schools at least on temporary basis in Darjeeling District on or before 15th October, 2011.
STATE of ORISSA:
12. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, Ms. Aparajita Sarangi, IAS, School of Mass Education, Orissa, is present in Court. She has made a categorical statement that drinking water facility has been provided in all the schools in the State of Orissa and she submits that a Cell has been created to monitor these facilities on regular basis. She further assures the Court that toilet facilities for boys and girls would also be provided in the schools as expeditiously as possible.
STATE of MAHARASHTRA:
13. The Chief Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra has filed an affidavit in which it is mentioned that they have provided permanent water supply in 93% of the schools and in the remaining 7% of the total schools, water tanks are provided and the tanks are filled by bringing water from the adjacent areas and they are in the process of giving permanent water supply in those schools, which would be done on or before 31st October, 2011. We direct the Chief Secretary to file further affidavit regarding the other infrastructural facilities which have been augmented by the State, on or before 15th October, 2011.
STATE of KARNATAKA:
14. No one is present on behalf of the State of Karnataka.
15. The Chief Secretary to the Government of Karnataka has filed an affidavit in which it is clearly mentioned that out of 46,400 schools in the State, in 43, 437 schools drinking water facility has been provided and in the remaining 2,963 schools drinking water facility would be made available on or before 31st October, 2011. We direct the State to ensure that till permanent water connections are provided in the schools, drinking water be made available in the schools at least through tanks/containers and an affidavit to that effect be filed by the Chief Secretary on or before 15th October, 2011. The Chief Secretary is also directed to indicate in the affidavit about the other infrastructural facilities which the State have provided in the schools in pursuance of the directions of this Court passed from time to time.
STATE of ASSAM:
16. The Chief Secretary to the Government of Assam has filed an affidavit in which it is mentioned that out of 41,251 Government schools in the State, drinking water facility has been provided in 33,970 schools and efforts are being made to provide permanent water connections in the remaining 7281 schools. Meanwhile, we direct the State of Assam to ensure that drinking water is made available in the remaining schools through plastic sintex tanks so that no school remains without drinking water facility. An affidavit to that effect be filed by the Chief Secretary on or before 15st October, 2011.
STATE of SIKKIM:
17. The Chief Secretary to the Government of Sikkim has filed an affidavit in which it is mentioned that in all the 778 Government schools in the State, they have provided drinking water facility. We direct the Chief Secretary of the State to file further affidavit regarding the other infrastructural facilities on or before 15st October, 2011.
NCT of DELHI:
18. The Chief Secretary to the Government of NCT of Delhi has filed an affidavit in which it is mentioned that all the schools under the Director of Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi have been provided with the facility of potable drinking water.
19. Learned senior counsel appearing for the NCT of Delhi submits that the facilities of toilets and electricity have also been provided in all the schools. The Chief Secretary to the Government of NCT of Delhi is directed to file further affidavit regarding the other infrastructural facilities on or before 15th October, 2011.
UNION TERRITORIES of CHANDIGARH and PUDUCHERYY:
20. The Chief Secretaries to these Union Territories have filed their affidavits stating therein that they have provided the facility of drinking water in all the schools in the respective Union Territories.
21. The Chief Secretaries to the Government of Chandigarh and Puducherry are directed to file further affidavits regarding the other infrastructural facilities on or before 15th October, 2011.
STATES of ANDHRA PRADESH, CHHATTISGARH, HIMACHAL PRADESH, HARYANA, JHARKHAND, UTTARAKHAND, MANIPUR, GUJARAT, KEARALA, MIZORAM, NAGALAND & TRIPURA:
22. In pursuance of the directions of this Court, the Chief Secretaries of these States have filed their affidavits stating that drinking water facility has been made available in all the schools in their States. They are directed to file further affidavit indicating about the availability of other infrastructural facilities, like toilets, electricity etc., on or before 15th October, 2011.
23. List this matter for further directions on 18th October, 2011 as first item.

© Manupatra Information Solutions Pvt. Ltd.