MANU/SC/1229/2010
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 631 of 2004
Decided On: 17.02.2010
Appellants: Environmental and Consumer Protect. Found.
Vs.
Respondent: Delhi Administration and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dalveer Bhandari and A.K. Patnaik, JJ.
Subject: Service
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 21A
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 21A
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Ravindra Bana, Adv.
For Respondents/Defendant: Parag P. Tripathi, ASG, Wasim A. Qadri, Purnima Bhat, Monisha Handa, Gargi Khanna, Anil Katiyar, Advs., Rakesh Kumar Khanna, Sr. Adv., Rashmi Khanna, Shailja Sinha, Dushyant Parashar, Purnima Jauhari, Bhavya Sethi, Gopal Singh, Amitesh Kumar, Ravi Kant, Anju Chopra, Advs. for P. Parmeswaran, Binu Tamta, Pratibha Jain, Surya Kant and Ramesh Babu M.R., Advs.
Industry: Services Sector
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
ORDER
1. The Registry to explain as to why two weeks' time was taken in sending the dasti notice when the direction was to send it through special messenger.
2. In the order dated 14th January, 2010, we noted that 5302 posts of Trained Graduate Teachers, 216 posts of Principals and a large number of posts of Vice-Principals are lying vacant. These posts are lying vacant since 2007.
3. Despite clear directions issued by this Court, the Union Public Service Commission, the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the Union of India have not filed their affidavits as directed.
4. After hearing Learned Counsel for the parties, we are fully convinced that there is lack of coordination amongst the various Governmental authorities. The right of children to free and compulsory education has now become a part of fundamental rights under Article 21A of the Constitution of India. The total indifference of the Governmental authorities is leading to violation of the fundamental rights of the children.
5. As last opportunity, we grant another two weeks' time to all the authorities concerned to file comprehensive affidavits dealing with the large number of vacant posts and the infrastructural facilities in the schools. We also direct the Director of Education, NCT of Delhi and Director of Education, Municipal corporation of Delhi and senior official of the Union of India to remain present in case affidavits as directed by this Court are not filed.
6. List this matter for further direction on 9th March, 2010.

© Manupatra Information Solutions Pvt. Ltd.