MANU/SC/0037/2004
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 352-353 of 2004 [Arising Out of SLP (C) Nos. 9454-9455 of 2001] and civil Appeal Nos. 354-357, 359-361, 362-364 and 365 of 2004 [Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 10008-10011, 17691-17693, 17694-17696, 22137 of 2001/SLP (C) No. 1491/04 Arising out of CA 358/04 Arising out of CC No. 5083 and T.C. (C) No. 39 of 2001]
Decided On: 19.01.2004
Appellants:Essar Oil Ltd.
Vs.
Respondent:Halar Utkarsh Samiti and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Ruma Pal and B.N. Srikrishna, JJ.
Counsels:
K.N. Rawal and Mukul Rohatgi, C. Aryama Sundaram, Additional Solicitor Generals, Rajiv Dutta, V.R. Reddy, N.D. Nanavati and Kailash Vasdev, Sr. Advs., Rishi Agrawala, Mahesh Agarwal, Vivek Sharma, E.C. Agrawala, Devang S. Nanavati, S.A. Mehta, V.D. Khanna, Hemantika Wahi, Sunita Hazarika, Parijat Sinha, Huzefa Ahmadi, Ejaz Maqbool, Ujjwal Kumar Jha, Nakul Dewan, Minakshi Nag, Colin Gonsalves, Aparna Bhat, P.P. Ramesh Kumar, Vipin M. Benjamin, M.N. Singh, Sanjay R. Hegde, Hemant Sharma, P. Parmeswaran, B.K. Prasad, Chanchal Kumar Ganguli and Shivaji M. Jadhav, Advs.For appearing parties
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 2(v), Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 24, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3(1); Forest (conservation) Act, 1980 - Section 2; Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 18, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2(15), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2(26), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2(37), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 21, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 22, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 23, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 24, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 24(2)(1), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 26-A(3), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 26A, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 26A(3), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 27, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 28, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 29, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 30, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 33, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 33(a), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 35, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 35(4), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 35(5), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 35(6), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 35(7), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 4, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 4(2)
Cases Referred:
Iskcon and Anr. vs. Nanigopal Ghosh and Ors. MANU/SC/2065/1998; Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd. vs. Proprietors of Indian Express Newspapers, Bombay Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0412/1988; Shri Sachidanand Pandey and Anr. vs. The State of West Bengal and Ors. MANU/SC/0136/1987
Relevant Section:
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 - Section 29; Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 - Section 35
Cases Overruled/Reversed:
Halar Utkarsh Samiti v. State of Gujarat, MANU/GJ/0730/1999 : 2001 2 Guj LR 964, Halar Utkarsh Samiti through Prakash H. Doshi Vs. State of Gujarat through Chief Secretary, MANU/GJ/0089/2001
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.07.2000 in SCA 1778/00, SCA 1778/00, SCA 1778/00, SCA 1778/00, MCA 250/01, SCA 1778/00 of the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad, MANU/GJ/0702/2000
Citing Reference:

Dissented
  1

Mentioned
  8

Relied On
  2

Case Note:
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 - Section 29 - Application by Essar Oil Limited, Bharat Oman Refineries Ltd. and Gujarat Positra Port for laying pipelines to pump crude oil across Marine National Park and Marine Sanctuary to their oil refineries in Jamnagar District - Public interest litigation petitions filed by Halar Utkarsh Samity and Jansangharsh Manch - High Court by its order allowed BORL to lay its pipelines but restrained others - Challenged by Special Leave Petition on ground that Section 29 does not envisage that "no permission would ever be granted" but stipulates that permission could be granted subject to certain conditions and the State Government had a right to grant such permission subject to forming the requisite satisfaction - Allowing appeal held that there being no a priori presumption of destruction of wild life in the laying of pipelines it could not be said, that invariable consequence of laying pipelines through ecologically sensitive areas would be destruction or removal of wild life - It would ultimately be a question of fact to be determined by experts in each case - Before according its approval to the grant of any permit under Sections 29 or 35, the State Government should consider whether the damage in respect of the proposed activity is reversible or not - If it is irreversible it amounts to destruction and no permission may be granted unless there is positive proof of the betterment of the lot of the wild life - Once the State Government has taken all precautions to ensure that the impact on the environment is transient and minimal, a court will not substitute its own assessment in place of the opinion of persons who are specialists and who may have decided the question with objectivity and ability - In view of prolonged and in depth scrutiny of the possible damage which could be caused by the laying of the pipelines by the appellant and the stringent conditions imposed to obviate such possible damage, and the opinion of the expert bodies, no reason to interfere with the grant of permission under the WPA. - There being absence of any study of any recognized expert body that environmental impact of laying the pipeline would lead to irreversible damage of the habitat or the destruction of wild life High Court erred in rejecting the reports of the experts who had opined in favour of BORL and the appellant - Since evidence on record that State Government and the appellant have taken precautions after consulting exports to see that the pipeline route causes minimal and reversible damage to the wild life, Directions given to State Govt. to issue authorization to appellants - Impugned judgment of High Court set aside
Industry: Oil and Gas
JUDGMENT
Ruma Pal, J.
1. Delay condoned. Leave granted.
2. The Jamnagar Marine National Park and Sanctuary lie along the lower lip of the Gulf of Katchch in the State of Gujarat covering reserve forests and territorial waters. Essar Oil Ltd., Bharat Oman Refineries Ltd. (BORL) and Gujarat Positra Port Co. Ltd., seek to lay pipelines to pump crude oil from a single buoy mooring in the Gulf across a portion of the Marine National Park and Marine Sanctuary to their oil refineries in Jamnagar District On the basis of separate public interest litigation petitions filed by Halar Utkarsh Samity and Jansangharsh Manch the High Court, by the impugned judgment, has held that BORL may lay its pipelines but the others may not and has restrained the State Government from granting any more authorizations and permissions for laying down any pipeline in any part of the sanctuary or national park. BORL was allowed to lay its pipelines by the High Court, since permission to do so had already been granted to it by the State government and since no such permission had, according to the High Court, been granted to Essar Oil, its application together with all pending applications were to be decided in accordance with what had been decided by the Court. This decision of the High Court has given rise to a series of Special Leave Petitions, which are:
1. SLP (C) Nos.9454-9455 of 2001
ESSAR OIL LTD. v. HALAR UTKARSH SAMITI AND ORS.
2. SLP (C) Nos. 10008-11 of 2001
ESSAR OIL LTD. v. JANSANGHARSH MANCH AND ORS.
3. SLP (C) Nos. 17691-93 of 2001
BHARAT OMAN REFINERIES LTD. v. HALAR UTKARSH SAMITI AND ORS.
4. SLP (C) Nos.17694-96 of 2001
STATE OF GUJARAT AND ANR. v. HALAR UTKARSH SAMITI AND ORS.
5. SLP (C) No. 22137 of 2001
GUJARAT POSITRA PORT CO. LTD. v. HALAR UTKARSH SAMITI JAMNAGAR AND ORS.
6. SLP (C) No. 1421/2004 @ CC No. 5083 of 2001
HALAR UTKARSH SAMITI AND ANR. v. STATE OF GUJARAT AND ORS.
3. Leave is granted in all these matters. In addition there is a transfer petition relating to a writ petition filed by Halar Utkarsh Samity challenging three specific orders passed by the State Government in connection with the grant of permission to BORL. The writ petition is transferred to this Court and is disposed of by us.
4. The legal issue in all the matters is the same. There are additional issues of fact relating to the grant of permission to Essar Oil Ltd., Gujarat Positra Pvt. Ltd., and BORL. We propose to take up the appeals relating to Essar Oil first, both for the determination of the common legal issue and the particular factual controversy in its case.
5. The questions involved in these appeals are -- Can pipelines carrying crude oil be permitted to go through the Marine National Park and Sanctuary and if so, has Essar Oil Ltd., (referred to hereafter as the appellant) in fact been so permitted?
6. The answer to the first question depends on an interpretation of the provisions of three statutes namely, the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Chronologically, the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (referred to hereafter as the WPA) is the earliest statute. It defines 'wildlife' in Section 2(37) as including:
"any animal, bees, butterflies, crustacea, fish and moths; and aquatic or land vegetation which form part of any habitat";
7. Section 18 empowers the State Government to notify its intention to constitute any area other than an area comprised within any reserve forest or the territorial waters as a sanctuary if it considers that such area is of adequate ecological, faunal, floral, geomorphological, natural or zoological significance, for the purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wild life or its environment. The Collector has been empowered to entertain and determine claims in respect of or over the notified area under Sections 21 to 24. After all claims in response to the Section 18 notification are disposed of the State Government is required under Section 26A to issue a notification specifying the limits of the areas which shall be comprised within the sanctuary, after which the area shall be a sanctuary on and from such date as may be specified in the notification. Under Sub-section (3) of Section 26A, "no alteration of the boundaries of a sanctuary shall be made except on a resolution passed by the Legislature of a State". It is not in dispute that the prescribed procedure has been followed and defined areas along the Gulf have been declared a sanctuary in accordance with the provisions of the WPA nor is it in dispute that the limits declared under Section 26A have not been altered under Section 26-A(3). Once an area has been declared as a sanctuary, entry into the area is restricted and regulated under Sections 27 and 28 and subject to permission being granted by the Chief Wild Life Warden who has, under Section 33, to control, manage and maintain all sanctuaries. The Chief Wild Life Warden is appointed under Section 4 of the Act and Sub-section (2) of Section 4 provides that "in the performance of his duties and exercise of his powers by or under this Act, the Chief Wild Life Warden shall be subject to such general or special directions, as the State Government may, from time to time give."
8. The procedure for declaring an area as a National Park is substantially similar to the procedure relating to sanctuaries and has been provided for in Section 35. It is nobody's case that the procedure has not been complied with by the State Government declaring the Jamnagar National Park as a National Park.
9. What we are really concerned with is Section 29 of the WPA and its interpretation. This can be said to be the core issue in all the appeals. Section 29 reads:
"29. Destruction, etc., in a sanctuary prohibited without permit--No person shall destroy, exploit or remove any wild life from a sanctuary or destroy or damage the habitat of any wild animal or deprive any wild animal of its habitat within such sanctuary except under and in accordance with a permit granted by the Chief Wild Life Warden and no such permit shall be granted unless the State Government, being satisfied that such destruction, exploitation or removal of wild life from the sanctuary is necessary for the improvement and better management of wild life therein, authorises the issue of such permit.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this Section, grazing or movement of live-stock permitted under Clause (d) of Section 33 shall not be deemed to be an act prohibited under this section."
10. The corresponding provision relating to National Parks is Section 35 Sub-section (6).
11. The next Statute which is of relevance is the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 (described as FCA subsequently). The Act is a brief one consisting of five Sections. The relevant Section is Section 2, which inter alia provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with the prior approval of the Central Government, any order directing inter alia "that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non-forest purpose". Rule 4 of the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 1981 provides for the procedure required to be followed by the State Government or other authority for seeking the prior approval. Rule 4(1) requires the proposal to be in the prescribed form and Sub-rule (2) provides that the proposal should be addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. The form requires several particulars, some of the relevant ones being:
1. Project details;
2. Location of the project/scheme;
3. Item-wise break-up of the total land required for the project/scheme alongwith its existing land use;
4. Details of forest land involved;
5. Details of compensatory afforestation scheme;
6. Cost-benefit analysis;
7. Whether, clearance from environmental angle is required; 8. Detailed opinion of the Chief Conservator of Forests/Head of the Forest Department concerned.
12. The Central Government may, under Rule 6, after referring the matter to a Committee if the area involved is more than 20 hectares, and holding such enquiry as it may consider necessary, grant approval to the proposal with or without conditions or reject the same.
13. The next Statute to be considered is the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (referred to as ERA). This Act was passed as a measure to implement the decisions taken at the United Nations conference on the Human Environment held in Stockholm in June, 1972 to which India was a party. The conference passed a resolution known as the Stockholm Declaration, which is dilated upon later by us. At this stage it is sufficient to note that the ERA reflects, in large measure, the Stockholm Declaration. According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons in the EPA, because of a multiplicity of regulatory agencies, there was need for an authority which could assume the lead role for study, planning, implementing long-term requirements of environment safety and to give directions for and co-ordinate a system of speedy and adequate response to emergency situations threatening the environment. Under Section 24, the provisions of the ERA and the Rules or orders made thereunder have been given overriding effect over any other enactment.
14. On 19th February, 1991, the Central Government under the provisions of Section 3(1), 2(v) of EPA Act read with Rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 declared coastal stretches of seas, bays, estuaries, creeks, rivers and backwaters which are influenced by tidal action in the landward side upto 500 metres from the High Tide Lines (HTL) and the land between the Low Tide Lines (LTL) and the HTL as Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) with effect from the date of the notification. Certain restrictions were placed on the setting up and expansion of industries, operations or processes etc. in the CRZ. Amongst the prohibited activities within the CRZ were:
"2(xi)construction activities in ecologically sensitive areas as specified in Annexure-I of this Notification;
2(xii) any construction activity between the Low Tide Line and High Tide Line except facilities for carrying treated effluents and waste water discharges into the sea facilities for carrying sea water for cooling purposes, oil gas and similar pipelines and facilities essential for activities permitted under this Notification;"
15. Annexure-I referred to in paragraph 2(xi) quoted above refers in turn to four categories of CRZs described in paragraph 6(1) of the Annexure. What is material for our purpose is Category-I (CRZ-I):
"(i) Areas that are ecologically sensitive and important such as national parks/marine parks, sanctuaries, reserve forests, wildlife habitats, mangroves, corals/coral reefs, areas, close to breeding and spawning grounds of fish and other marine life, areas of outstanding natural beauty, historical heritage areas, areas rich in genetic diversity, areas likely to be inundated due to rise in sea level consequent upon global warming and such other areas as may be declared by the Central Government or the concerned authorities at the State/Union Territory level from time to time.
(ii) Area between the Low Tide Line and the High Tide Line."
16. Paragraph 6(2) states that the development or construction activities in different categories of CRZ areas shall be regulated by the concerned authorities at the State/Union Territory level, in accordance with the following norms:
"CRZ-I
No new construction shall be permitted within 500 metres of the High Tide Lines. No construction activity, except as listed under 2(xii), will be permitted between the Low Tide Line and the High Tide Line." (Emphasis added )
17. This notification was subsequently amended on 12th April, 2001 by the Central Government by issuing a fresh notification of that date being notification. S.O. 329(E). Under the heading CRZ-I, the following paragraph was substituted:
"No new construction shall be permitted in CRZ-I except (a) Projects relating to Department of Atomic Energy and (b) Pipelines, conveying systems including transmission lines and (c) facilities that are essential for activities permissible under CRZ-I. Between the LTL and the HTL, activities are specified under paragraph 2 (xii) may be permitted. In addition, between LTL and HTL in areas which are not ecologically sensitive and important, the following may be permitted: (a) Exploration and extraction of Natural Gas (b) activities as specified under proviso of sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph 2, and (c) Construction of dispensaries, schools, public rain shelters, community toilets, bridges, roads, jetties, water, supply, drainage, sewerage which are required for traditional inhabitants of the Sunderbans Bio-sphere reserve area, West Bengal, on a case to case basis, by the West Bengal State coastal zone Management authority."
18. The permits to be granted by the Central Government under the FCA and under EPA are independent of each other and of the permission which the State Government is required to give under Sections 29 and 35 of the WPA. Clearance under each of the three statutes is essential before any activity otherwise prohibited under those Acts may be proceeded with. In these appeals there is no challenge to the grant of permission to the appellant under the FCA and the EPA by the Central Government. The challenge by the respondent/writ petitioners before the High Court which was accepted, rested on an interpretation of Sections 29 and 35 of the WPA. Construing Section 29, the High Court held that the marine sanctuary and marine national park were not to be utilized for any purpose other than the purposes prescribed under the Wild Life (Protection) Act and except in accordance with Sections 26-A(3), 30 and Section 35(6) thereof. The High Court said that "the Government could arrive at the satisfaction that it is necessary to grant such permission for destruction of wildlife, as otherwise in case such permission for destruction, exploitation or removal is not granted the same would adversely affect the improvement and better management of the wildlife". The word "necessary" was construed to mean indispensable, needful or essential. It was held that unless the Government was satisfied "beyond reasonable doubt" that the laying of the pipeline was indispensable for the better management of the wildlife, no permission could be granted under Section 29. The High Court found that it could not be said that the laying of crude oil pipeline was necessary or indispensable for the purpose of improvement and better management of the wildlife. The reports given by the Institute of Oceanography and NEERI were held not to be binding on the Court. It was further held that neither of the expert bodies had reported that the laying of the crude pipeline in the sanctuary area was necessary for the better hearth, improvement and management of the wildlife therein. The High Court was also of the view that it was not open to the Executive to interfere with the power of the Legislature under Section 26A(3) by granting permission to lay pipelines thus "directly or indirectly" affecting the alteration of the boundaries of the sanctuary. Summing up, the High Court's view was that the State Government can accord permission under Section 29 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act only if it is necessary for improvement and better management of wild life and since the laying of pipeline through the sanctuary was not for the improvement and better management of the wild life no permit could be granted under Section 29.
19. The appellant's contention is that Section 29 requires the satisfaction of the State Government as a pre-requisite for a grant of permit by the Chief Conservator only in respect of the destruction, exploitation or removal of any wildlife from a sanctuary and not in respect of the destruction or damage of the habitat of any wild animal or deprivation of any wildlife of its habitat within such sanctuary. Even in respect of the first class of cases, according to the appellant, the State Government could grant a permit if in the facts of a given case, the damage or destruction to the wildlife would result in the improvement and better management of wildlife.
20. According to the State Government, which has supported the appellant, the High Court had misconstrued Section 29 of the WPA to restrain the State Government from granting any more permits for laying down any pipelines in any part of the Sanctuary or the National Park. According to the State Government, if Section 29 envisaged a total prohibition of any development in an ecologically sensitive area then the legislation would have simply said in clear words "no permission would ever be granted" but when the Section itself stipulates that permission can be granted subject to certain conditions, the State Government has a right to grant such permission subject to forming the requisite satisfaction. According to the State Government, research has shown that "subsequent to the laying of pipelines in connection with the project of GSFC that even after laying of the pipeline with attendant care, the area which was earlier devoid of marine life, living coral and mangroves has improved in marine biota, with regeneration of coral".
21. BORL has criticised the decision of the High Court on the additional ground that the Division Bench had ignored an earlier decision of the same High Court relating to Reliance Petroleum Limited as well as the decision of the High Court on litigation filed by the Samiti against BORL. The earlier decisions had construed Section 29 of the WPA as contended by the appellant and this Court had rejected the Special Leave Petitions against those decisions.
22. The Halar Utkarsh Samiti, one of the initiators of the public interest litigation in respect of the laying of the pipelines before the High Court and who is now a respondent before us (referred to hereafter as 'the Samiti') has submitted that the prohibition under Section 29 puts a complete ban on destruction, exploitation, removal of any wildlife from a sanctuary unless sanction is accorded by a permit issued by the Chief Wildlife Warden. The Chief Wildlife Warden does not have an absolute discretion to grant such permits and his power is subject to being authorised by the State Government in this behalf and only if the State Government is satisfied that the destruction, exploitation and removal of the wildlife is necessary for the improvement and better management of the wildlife in that sanctuary. It is also submitted by the Samiti that if permission were granted under Section 29 to the laying of pipelines, this would defeat the mandate of Sections 26-A(3) and 35(5) of the WPA since it would amount to an alteration of the area of the sanctuary or national park which was impermissible except by means of a resolution passed by the State Legislature.
23. The Jan Sangharsh Manch, the respondent No. 1 in one of the appeals and also an initiator of public interest litigation before the Gujarat High Court against BORL (referred to hereinafter as the Manch), has submitted that the Marine Park in Jamnagar was the first of its kind in India and housed diverse eco-systems with a variety of flora and fauna including rare species of both. It was submitted that neither Section 29 nor Section 35(6) admit of a situation where the permitted activity would involve severe damage to the wildlife, forest and marine environment Examples of such "necessary" destruction etc. of wildlife/forest would be the cutting of trees to prevent the spread of forest fires or an infestation or the culling of animals or weed eradication. It is pointed out that such measures originate from the Chief Wildlife Warden himself and were only for the purpose of enhancing the wildlife and its habitat. Even this power was subject to check by the State Government. It is pointed out that there was a distinction between the provisions of the WPA and the FCA. Whereas under the latter Act a situation could arise when the Central Government would have to balance the conflicting interests of development and ecology and grant permission to use forests for non forest purposes, under the WPA there is no question of any such balancing. No non-forest activity is permitted at all as long as the area continues to be part of a park or sanctuary and until the State Legislature denitrifies the affected area in the manner prescribed under Section 26A(3) for sanctuaries and under Section 35(5) for national parks. Our attention was drawn to the provisions of the WPA particularly Sections 35(4) and 35(7) which completely prohibit any non-forest activity within the national park where the prohibition was more stringent than the prohibition in respect of sanctuaries under Section 24(2)(1) and 33(a). Given the nature of the prohibition, it is submitted that it was inconceivable that the laying and maintenance of pipelines could at all be permitted in a national park. The final submission was that unless the prohibition was considered to be absolute with regard to parks, it would lead to the absurd result that permission from the Central Government was necessary to use a forest for non-forest purposes but a State Government's satisfaction would be enough in respect of sanctuaries in national parks where the statutory requirement was more stringent and the ecology more fragile.
24. As already noted, the High Court held that the appellant could not be allowed to lay its pipeline because, unlike BORL, the permission had not till then been accorded to the appellant by the State Government. We could have allowed these appeals on the simple ground that the High Court should not have decided the issue whether the appellant had in fact been granted permission under the WPA, without issuing any notice to the appellant or giving it any opportunity to be heard. This was the very ground which persuaded this Court to set aside the decision of the Calcutta High Court in Iskon and Anr. v. Nanigopal Ghosh and Ors. MANU/SC/2065/1998 : (2000)10SCC595 , a public interest litigation, and remand the matter back to the High Court for re-disposal after giving an opportunity of being heard to the affected parties. However, we do not propose to follow the same course of action as the matter has been argued on merits at length, and given the nature of the stakes involved, brooks no further delay.
25. The pivotal issue, as we have already noticed, is the interpretation of Section 29 of the WPA. In our opinion this must be done keeping in mind the Stockholm Declaration of 1972 which has been described as the "Magna-Carta of our environment". Indeed in the wake of the Stockholm Declaration in 1972, as far as this country is concerned, provisions to protect the environment were incorporated in the Constitution by an amendment in 1976. Article 48A of the Constitution now provides that the "State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country". It is also now one of the fundamental duties of every citizen of the country under Article 51A(g) "to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife, and to have compassion for living creatures".
26. Certain principles were enunciated in the Stockholm Declaration giving broad parameters and guidelines for the purposes of sustaining humanity and its environment Of these parameters, a few principles are extracted which are of relevance to the present debate. Principle 2 provides that the natural resources of the earth including the air, water, land, flora and fauna especially representative samples of natural eco-systems must be safeguarded for the benefit of present and future generations through careful planning and management as appropriate. In the same vein, the 4th principle says "man has special responsibility to safeguard and wisely manage the heritage of wild life and its habitat which are now gravely imperiled by a combination of adverse factors. Nature conservation including wild life must, therefore, receive importance in planning for economic developments". These two principles highlight the need to factor in considerations of the environment while providing for economic development. The need for economic development has been dealt with in Principle 8 where it is said that "economic and social development is essential for ensuring a favourable living and working environment for man and for creating conditions on earth that are necessary for improvement of the quality of life".