MANU/SC/0010/1980
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition No. 3804 of 1980
Decided On: 13.11.1980
Appellants:Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union, Sindri and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J., A.D. Koshal, P.N. Bhagwati, S. Murtaza Fazal Ali and V.R. Krishna Iyer, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: R.K. Garg, Sunil Kumar Jain, Dinesh Kumar Garg, Sukumar Sahu and V.J. Francis, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: L.N. Sinha, Att. Genearl, M.M. Abdul Khader, T.V.S.N. Chari and M.N. Shroff, Advs. for Respondent No. 1 and M.K. Banerjee, Addl. Sol. Genl. for Respondent No. 2
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 14; CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 19 (1) (g)
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Companies Act, 1956 - Section 617; Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(f), Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(g), Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 226(1), Constitution Of India - Article 25, Constitution Of India - Article 311, Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 43A, Constitution Of India - Article 66(1), Constitution Of India - Article 68(20)
Cases Referred:
Bar Council of Maharashtra vs. M.V. Dabholkar and Ors. MANU/SC/0003/1975; The Bar Council of Maharashtra vs. M.V. Dabholkar and Ors. MANU/SC/0670/1975
Disposition:
Petition Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Mentioned
  1

Case Note:
Constitution - Violation of fundamental rights - Article 14 and 19 of Constitution of India - Petitioner sought for directing Respondents not to sell away plant and equipment and they should be asked to withdraw their decision to sell the same and said decision should be quashed as being illegal and unconstitutional - Hence, this Petition - Whether, any of fundamental rights of Petitioners was violated by sale of plants and equipment of Factory - Held, plants which were initially advertised for sale, went through variation, that after sale was adjourned, requests received by F.C.I. from other public sector undertakings stating, that they were in need of part of equipment which was advertised for sale, led to substantial reduction in goods advertised for sale - However, officers regarding sale had attracted criticism that during course of negotiations original bid was reduced without justifying cause - Moreover, reduction in price was necessary and fair consequence of reduction in quantity of goods later offered for sale - Thus, one could not exclude possibility that better price might have been realized in fresh public auction, but such possibilities could not vitiate sale or justify allegation of mala fides - Hence, sale was not vitiated by any unfairness or arbitrariness - Therefore, fundamental rights of Petitioners under Article 14 and Article 19 of Constitution were not violated - Petition dismissed.
Ratio Decidendi:
"Action taken by any authority without specifying any cause shall amount to violation of fundamental right."
JUDGMENT
Authored By : Y.V. Chandrachud, V.R. Krishna Iyer
Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J.
1. By this petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, the petitioners challenge the legality of the sale of certain plants and equipment of the Sindri Fertilizer Factory, whereby the highest tender submitted by Respondent 4 in the sum of Rs. 4.25 crores. was accepted on May 30, 1980. The relief sought by the petitioners is that the respondents should be directed not to sell away the plant and equipment, that they should be asked to withdraw their decision to sell the same and that the said decision should be quashed as being illegal and unconstitutional.
2. Petitioner 1 is a Union of the Workers of the Factory, Petitioner 2, Shri A.K. Roy, a Member of Parliament from Dhanbad, is the President of that Union, while Petitioners 3 and 4 are workers employed in the Factory. Respondent 1 to the Writ Petition is the Union of India, Respondent 2 is the Fertilizer Corporation of India, ('FCI'), Respondent 3 is the Sindri Fertilizer Factory, while the added Respondent 4, Ganpatrai Agarwal, is the highest tenderer. Respondent 2, a Government of India Undertaking, is a Company incorporated under the Companies Act 1956 and is a 'Government Company' within the meaning of Section 617 of that Act. It established the Respondent 3 Factory, which was commissioned in 1951. By Article 66(1) of the Articles of Association of respondent 2, its directors are appointed by the President of India.
3. On January 4, 1980 the Board of Directors of respondent 2, (FCI), decided that tenders should be invited for the sale of 'Redundant/retired plants and equipment of respondent 3. In pursuance of that decision, an advertisement was inserted in the newspapers on February 25, 1980 inviting tenders for the sale of nine units of the "closed down chemical plants" of the Factory on "as is where is" basis. The advertisement gave to the intending purchasers the option to quote for four alternatives, one of which was the quotation for individual equipment such as pumping sets and compressors. Each tenderer was required to submit three separate envelopes : Envelope No. 1 relating to the payment of earnest money; envelope No. 2 relating to the terms and conditions of the sale; and envelope No. 3 relating to the amount of bid offered by the tenderer. The offers were to be valid until June 19, 1980.
4. On March 20, 1980 when the envelopes bearing No. 1 were opened, it was found that two tenderers had not complied with the term as to the payment of the earnest money. As a result, the number of valid tenders was reduced to nine. Discussions took place thereafter between the tenderers and the authorities, as a result of which an agreed formula was evolved regarding the exclusion of the weights of foundation and the exclusion of sales-tax from the bids offered. A few items were also excluded from the list of articles advertised for sale. In the light of these modifications, the tenderers were asked to submit fresh quotations in a separate envelope marked 'No. 4'.
5. On March 21, 1980 envelopes bearing No. 3 which contained the original offers and those bearing No. 4 which contained the modified offers, were opened in the presence of the tenderers. The highest original offer was that of respondent 4 in the sum of Rs. 7.6 crores. The highest modified offer of Rs. 6.2 crores was also made by respondent 4. The sale was thereafter adjourned.
6. On March 31, 1980 a letter was received by Respondent 2 that a part of the plants and equipment which were advertised for sale were needed by the Fertilizer (Planning and Development) India Ltd. for the purposes of experiment and research. On April 10, 1980 a similar request was received from the Ramagundam Division of Respondent 2. On May 14, 1980 the Board of Directors decided that only those items should be offered for sale which remained after meeting the requirements of the Fertilizer (Planning and Development) and the Ramagundam Division and that fresh offers should be invited for the reduced stock, restricted to the tenderers who had submitted modified tenders in sums exceeding Rs. 4 crores. There were six such tenders amongst the nine valid tenders. A week later, the six tenderers who had submitted those tenders were called to Sindri and a fresh list of reduced items was furnished to them. They submitted their revised tenders in sealed covers on May 23, 1980. On May 24, the Tender Committee considered the offer made by Respondent 4 in the sum of Rs. 4.25 crores as the best, that being the highest amongst the fresh reduced offers. The Tender Committee referred the matter to the Board on the same date and on May 29, the Board gave its approval to the acceptance of respondent 4's offer. On May 30, a letter of Intent was issued by Respondent 2 in the name of Respondent 4 who paid the security deposit of Rs. 50 lakhs on June 13, 1980. An order of sale in favour of Respondent 4 was issued by Respondent 2 on July 7, 1980 whereupon Respondent 4 started dismantling the machinery and equipment which he had purchased. This Writ Petition was filed on August 14, 1980. On August 25, the Court issued a show cause notice on the writ petition and stayed the sale.
7. The petitioners challenge the sale, inter alia, on the following grounds :
(1) that the decision to sell the plants and equipment of the Factory was taken without calling for any report, expert or otherwise;
(2) that the original tender of Rs. 7.6 crores was unaccountably reduced to Rs. 4.25 crores;
(3) that the price of the plants and equipment, which was ultimately realised in the sale was manipulated with ulterior purposes;
(4) that the decision to restrict the fresh offers, in respect of the reduced equipment, to the tenderers who had submitted tenders for more than Rs. 4 crores was unfair and arbitrary;
(5) that the said decision resulted in a huge loss to the public exchequer since, if the sale was readvertised, an appreciably higher price would have been realised; and
(6) the sale has jeopardised the employment of 11000 odd workers who face retrenchment as a result of the sale.
8. Petitioners 3 and 4 support this petition under Article 32 of the Constitution by contending that the sale will deprive them of their fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) to carry on their occupation as industrial workers. They contend further that the sale is in violation of the provisions of Article 14, since it is arbitrary and unfair.
9. The learned Attorney General, who appears on behalf of the Union of India, has raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the writ Petition on the ground that in the first place, the petitioners have no locus standi to file the petition and secondly, that the impugned sale does not violate any of the fundamental rights of the petitioners. We must decide this objection before considering the contentions raised by Shri R.K. Garg on behalf of the petitioners.
10. Article 32 of the Constitution which guarantees by Clause (1) the right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III, provides by Clause (2) that :
The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.
It is manifest that the jurisdiction conferred on this Court by Article 32 can be exercised for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III and for no other purpose. Clause (1) as well as Clause (2) of Article 32 bring out this point in sharp focus. As contrasted with Article 32, Article 226(1) of the Constitution provides that :
Notwithstanding anything in Article 32 every High Court shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any Government, within those territories directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.
(emphasis supplied).
The difference in the phraseology of the two Articles brings out the marked difference in the nature and purpose of the right conferred by these Articles. Whereas the right guaranteed by Article 32 can be exercised for the enforcement of fundamental rights only, the right conferred by Article 226 can be exercised not only for the enforcement of fundamental rights but for any other purpose.
11. The jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court by Article 32 is an important and integral part of the basic structure of the Constitution because it is meaningless to confer fundamental rights without providing an effective remedy for their enforcement, if and when they are violated. A right without a remedy is a legal conundrum of a most grotesque kind. While the draft Article 25, which corresponds to Article 32, was being discussed in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. Ambedkar made a meaningful observation by saying :
If I was asked to name any particular article in this Constitution as the most important-an article without which this Constitution would be a nullity-I could not refer to any other article except this one. It is the very soul of the Constitution and the very heart of it and I am glad that the House has realised its importance. (Constituent Assembly Debates, December 9, 1948, Vol. VII, p. 953).
But though the right guaranteed by Article 32 is one of the highly cherished rights conferred by the Constitution, the purpose for which that right can be enforced is stated in the very article which confers that right. The violation of a fundamental right is the sine qua non of the exercise of the right conferred by Article 32.
12. That makes it necessary to consider whether any of the fundamental rights of the petitioners is violated or is in the imminent danger of being violated by the sale of the plants and equipment of the Factory. The grievance of the petitioners is that two of their fundamental rights are violated by the sale, one under Article 19(1)(g) and the other under Article 14 of the Constitution.
13. We find no substance in the grievance that the petitioners' right under Article 19(1)(g) is violated or is in the imminent danger of being violated by the sale. That Article confers on all citizens the right to practise any profession or to carry on any occupation trade or business. The right of the petitioners to carry on an occupation is not infringed by the sale mediately or immediately, actually or potentially, for two reasons. In the first place, Shri R.C. Malhotra, who is the Chief Engineer of the Sindri Unit, says in paragraph 5 of the counter-affidavit filed by him on behalf of the FCI, that although the old plants and equipment had to be shut down from 1976 to 1979 because they had become redundant, unsafe or unworkable, no employee was deprived of his employment on that account. Shri Malhotra says further in the same paragraph and in paragraph 6 of the counter-affidavit, that the management of the FCI had decided to deploy the workmen working in the plants that had to be shut down in various other plants set up under the scheme of modernisation and rationalisation and in the various facilities that had been renovated in the Sindri complex itself. Thus, not only did the sale not affect the employment of the workers employed in the Factory, but those of them who were rendered surplus from time to time on account of the closure of the plants were absorbed in alternate employment in the same complex.
14. Secondly, the right of Petitioners 3 and 4 and of the other workers to carry on the occupation of industrial workers is not, in any manner affected by the impugned sale. The right to pursue a calling or to carry on an occupation is not the same thing as the right to work in a particular post under a contract of employment. If the workers are retrenched consequent upon and on account of the sale, it will be open to them to pursue their rights and remedies under the Industrial Laws. But the point to be noted is that the closure of an establishment in which a workman is for the time being employed does not by itself infringe his fundamental right to carry on an occupation which is guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. Supposing a law were passed preventing a certain category of workers from accepting employment in a fertiliser factory, it would be possible to contend then that the workers have been deprived of their right to carry on an occupation. Even assuming that some of the workers may eventually have to be retrenched in the instant case, it will not be possible to say that their right to carry on an occupation has been violated. It would be open to them, though undoubtedly it will not be easy, to find out other avenues of employment as industrial workers. Article 19(1)(g) confers a broad and general right which is available to all persons to do work of any particular kind and of their choice. It does not confer the right to hold a particular job or to occupy a particular post of one's choice. Even under Article 311 of the Constitution, the right to continue in service falls with the abolition of the post in which the person is working. The workers in the instant case can no more complain of the infringement of their fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) than can a Government servant complain of the termination of his employment on the abolition of his post: The choice and freedom of the workers to work as industrial workers is not affected by the sale. The sale may at the highest affect their locum, but it does not affect their locus, to work as industrial workers. This is enough unto the day on Article 19(1)(g).