MANU/SC/0284/1991
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
CA No. 6266 of 1990
Decided On: 13.09.1990
Appellants:G.B. Mahajan and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: The Jalgaon Municipal Council and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
M.N. Venkatachaliah, N.D. Ojha and J.S. Verma, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: M.K. Garg, Adv
Subject: Municipal Tax
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Cases Referred:
Ramana Dayanand Shetty v. International Airport Authority MANU/SC/0048/1979; Kasturilal Laxmi Reddy v. State of J and K MANU/SC/0079/1980; New State Ice Company v. Ernest A. Liebmann, 285 US 262; Tiller v. Atlantic Coast Line Rail Road Company, 318 US 54, 143 ALR 967; Davis Contractors v. Fareham U.D.C., 1956 (2) All ER 145; Nottinghamshire Country Council v. Secretary of State for Environment, 1986 AC 240; Chief Constable v. Evans, 1982 (3) All ER 141
Case Note
Citing Reference:


Dissented
  5

Mentioned
  5

Case Note:
Contract - Validity of Tender - Whether contracts between Municipal Corporation and appellant/Developer for execution of project for Administrative Building and Commercial Complex on plot of land belonging to Municipality is legal ? - Held, it appears that in context of expanding exigencies of urban planning it will be difficult for Court to say that particular policy option was better than another - Contention that project is ultra vires does not appeal - Therefore contention does not justify quashing of resolution of Municipal Council - Appellants have not been able to establish that essential elements of transaction are such that Section 92 of Act is violated - Developer is authorised to induct occupiers in respect of area earmarked for him exercises with consent of Municipal Council - This is not impermissible when it is with express consent of Municipal Council - Respondent no 6 has indulged in such practices in matter of disposal of occupancy rights - This is allegation which is emphatically repudiated by respondent no 6 - Accommodation in commercial complex is such good competitive selling proposition that there is great demand and limited supply enabling respondent no 6 to exploit situation - This is matter of allegation - To denounce municipal authority's decision, otherwise valid on ground that developer is likely to resort to transactions of unaccounted money would as judicial remedy, be unthinkable - Therefore conclusion of High Court does not call for interference - Hence, appeals dismissed
ORDER
M.N. Venkatachaliah J.
1. Petitioners seek special leave to appeal to this Court from the order dated 18.9.1989 made by the Bombay High Court, Aurangabad Bench, dismissing appellants' Writ Petition No. 2404 of 1989 in which they assailed certain contracts of the Municipal Council of Jalgaon with a Developer of real estate for the execution of a project for 'Administrative Building' and a 'Commercial Complex' on a plot of land belonging to the Municipality.
2. We have heard Sri R.K. Jain, learned Senior Advocate for the Petitioners; Sri K.K. Singhvi, Sri A.S. Bhasme and Dr. Y.S. Chitale, learned Senior Advocates for Respondents 1, 4, 5, and 6 respectively.
Special leave granted. The main appeal is taken-up for final hearing, heard and disposed of by this judgment.
3. The controversy relates to a project for the development of real estate sponsored by the Town Municipal Council, Jalgaon, in the State of Maharashtra. In the year 1913 the Municipal Council, it would appear, received by way of gift a piece of land of an extent of 5 acres and 32 guntas from a certain Lila Dhar Bhatia. The land had been in the use of the Agricultural Produce Market Committee, Jalgaon, as a cotton-market and wholesale fruit and vegetable market. The Municipal Council having entertained the idea of putting the land to a better and more profitable use persuaded the Market Committee to yield-up possession. The terms of the original gift, it would appear, stipulated conditions that the land be put to use for only as a cotton and vegetable market. In order to enable itself to put the land to other and more beneficial uses and to exploit the commercial-potential which the properly had with the passage of time acquired, the Municipal Council appears to have approached the heirs of the original donor who appear to have agreed to amend the terms of the gift accordingly. But the permission was not without strings attached. The project as envisaged by the Municipal Council, contemplated, amongst other things, the erection of a commercial complex. The heirs appear to have bargained for and secured a benefit that they should be given five-shops free of cost in the commercial complex.
4. The Municipal Council invited competitive proposals as to the ways in which the potential of the land could be commercially exploited and invited competitive plans and designs on the basis of which the Architects could be selected from architects all over the country. By its Resolution dated 17.3.1988 the Municipal Council selected M/s. Kabra Chaudhary Associates as Architects for the project.
The project envisaged a Central Administrative Building with ground plus 17 floors intended to be utilised by the Municipal Council for locating its own offices and an adjacent structure with a basement plus five upper floors to be used as vegetable-market and a commercial complex. The broad aspects as to the funding of the project were that the project was to be executed by a "Developer" who would be required to take-up and execute the project at his own cost; that the developer would be obliged to rehabilitate 486 small-time vegetable vendors who were in occupation of the land in various units by providing them small stalls at, what was described as, a confessional-premium of Rs. 3,000 per stall; that 83 more shops, at fixed premia of Rs. 40,000 each, be given to Adatias who were carrying on their business on the property and that, further, another 60 shops, at the same rate, be allotted to some traders who are stated to have encroached upon the land. This was in addition to the five shops, which had to be made available to the heirs of the original donor free of cost. The nature of the rights conferred on these beneficiaries is stated to be "occupancy rights" for a period of 50 years Under Section 272(1) of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965 (Act for short) which regulated the matter. The municipality would get rents from those occupants at rates stipulated. The administrative block comprising of ground plus 17 floors was, however, intended to be handed over to the Municipal Council free of cost for its own use and of its tenants.
5. The project-scheme contemplated a mode of financing which contemplated that in consideration of the "developer" putting-up the entire construction at its own cost and making various allotments to the shop-keepers to whom the Municipal Council had given assurances of alternative accommodation at fixed rates of premia and providing Ground plus 17 floors of the Administrative building free of cost to the Municipality, the developer would be entitled and at liberty to dispose of the occupancy rights in respect of the rest of the accommodation in "Commercial-Complex" and retain the premia paid by the disposes so to reimburse itself the financial outlays on the project plus its profit. The occupiers, including those who would have the benefit of the allotments at such fixed-rates as well as those to be inducted by the developer, were expected to pay rents to the Municipal Council for the period of 50 years at rates envisaged in the scheme, though, however, certain incentives and concessions were afforded for the first two periods of 3 years each. According to the financial estimates prepared by the Municipal Council with the assistance of its architects as to the economics of the scheme the project was to involve a financial outlay of about Rs. 11 crores. On certain estimates prepared by it the Municipal Council was of the view that the project would benefit the local community both from the immediate as well as long-term advantages if this mode of financing and execution of the project was adopted. It was the Council's view that while the project would help to rehabilitate all those businessmen and traders who were carrying on business on the land and obviate protracted litigation for their eviction, the Municipal Council would, in addition, get a building consisting of a Ground plus 17 floors in the Central Administrative Block which would be an impressive structure 70 metres in height adding greatly to the value of the municipal estate. It was also said that the rents from those occupants in the commercial complex would considerably augment the municipal revenues.
6. After enunciating these criteria the project was put to tender. Advertisements were taken out in the Newspapers and it is stated that five Developers responded and submitted their tenders. After a process of scrutiny of the tenders and elimination of ineligible and noncompetitive ones, the tender of respondent No. 6 was accepted by the Municipal Council by its unanimous Resolution dated 8.10.1988. On 9.10.1988, a "Letter of Intent" was issued to the Respondent No. 6, which, in turn, on 15.10.1988 issued its own advertisement of the project. On 18.10.1988, a formal agreement was entered into between the Municipal Council and the Respondent No. 6 in this behalf.
7. Appellants who are residents of Jalgaon and who entertained serious misgiving as to the legal permissibility, the economic soundness and propriety of the policy of this venture petitioned to the Collector of the District under the provisions of the 'Act' to suspend the Resolutions of the Municipal Council undertaking the project and the agreement with Respondent 6 for its execution. They urged that the transaction really amounted to grant of a lease of 50 years prohibited Under Section 92 of the "Act"; that under the Act a scheme of this kind could not be embarked upon without the sanction of the Development Department of the Government of the State of Maharashtra; that the transaction resulted in the creation of an impermissible encumbrance on the property of the Municipal Council in favour of the developer and lastly that the intended user violated the original terms of the gift. The Collector suspended the impugned resolutions. But the Minister, in a Revision-Petition preferred against the Collector's order, stayed the operation of that order. Simultaneously, some persons, including some of those who had moved the Collector, filed Writ Petition No. 1765/1988 in the High Court assailing the said Resolutions. It is necessary to refer in any great detail to the several proceedings that ensued. Suffice it to say, in WP No. 1765/1988, in which the Resolutions touching the clearance of the project and the agreement with respondent No. 6 had been assailed and the Writ-Petition 1825/1988 in which the Minister's order staying the Collector's order was challenged came up together before a Division Bench of the High Court on 20.12.1988. The contention that was pressed appears to be that the calculations forming the basis of the financial estimates of the project were made grossly under-estimating the probable receipts by way of premia for the grant of occupancy-rights with the intention of giving an opportunity for unjust enrichment to Respondent 6 as, according to the appellants, the occupancy-rights for the shops were capable of fetching far higher premia than those estimates made by the Municipality. Learned Judges of the Division Bench who dealt with the writ-petitions were of the opinion that any apprehension in that behalf would be allayed if it was ensured that any such excess should go to the benefit of the Municipality. Accordingly, the Division Bench directed that in the matter of disposal of the occupancy-rights in regard to the shops-other than those ear-marked for the preferential category of existing businessmen and traders-tenders should be called from the public so that the difference between what was taken into account in the estimates of the project and what was actually secured in response to the advertisement, might go to the benefit of the Municipality. The order said:
Shri Singhvi, appearing for the Jalgaon Municipal Council, states that the Council will invite fenders for sale of 68 shops on the ground floor with basement on the eastern side facing Sane Guruji Road, stipulating Rs. 3,50,000 per shop as the floor price, and of 32 shops on the ground floor without basement, on the rear of the above 68 shops, i.e. on the western side and facing Jaikisanwadi, stipulating Rs. 2,50,000 per shop as the floor price. The advertisement will be given within a week from today and it will be repeated within a space of two days in between. The advertisement will mention that Rs. 25,000 have to be paid at the time of submitting the tender for the shop.
If the applications are received tendering more amount than is stipulated in the notice, then the surplus amount will be credited to the Municipal Council and only the floor-price shall be paid to the contractor.
If applications for all the shops are not received, or, if the applications received tender less amount than the floor-price, then the Council is at liberty to go ahead with their present scheme
[W.P. No. 1765/1988 dated 20.12.1988]
It would appear that the advertisement issued in that behalf did not elicit any favourable response from the public. The matter was listed again before the High Court on 21.1.1989. The Division Bench held that its earlier order dated 10.12.1988 was self-executor and had put an end to the Writ-Petition finally and nothing really survived in the Writ-Petition. That was how WP No. 1765/1988 came to an end. Writ-Petition 1825/1988, directed against the stay order granted by the Minister, was disposed of on 8.2.1989. In Review-Petition 223 of 1989 appellants had sought a review of the order dated 20.12.1988 which was also dismissed on 7.2.1989. The advertisement issued pursuant to the order dated 20.12.1988, was itself challenged in a separate Writ-Petition and that Writ-Petition was also dismissed on 8.2.1989.
8. All these orders were assailed before this Court in Special Leave Petition No. 3292/1989, SLP No. 3222/1989, SLP No. 3268/1989 respectively. The SLP 3293/1989 which arose out of the Writ-Petition challenging Minister's order was disposed of on 17.4.1989 by this Court with the following observation:
Since the order made by the Hon'ble Minister is evidently in the nature of ad-interim order, it is open to the petitioner to move the Minister for final disposal. It is hoped that the Minister, having regard to the importance of the matter, will expeditiously dispose of the matter. The minister will also consider whether the scheme in question is in conformity with the statutory provisions. With these observations the Special Leave Petition is dismissed.
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 3293 and 3268/1989 which arose out of the orders in W.P. 1765 of 1988 and the Writ-Petition preferred against the Advertisement were also dismissed with the following observation:
In view of the above order in Special Leave petition (Civil) No. 3222/1989 these Special Leave Petitions are dismissed.
9. Later, the Minister disposed of the Revision Application by his order dated 3.8.1989. The Minister took into account the order made by the High Court in Writ-Petition No. 1765/1988 and was persuaded to the view that that decision could not be ignored by him. That apart, he also went into the merits of the scheme and recorded findings against the appellants. Against this order of Minister, appellants preferred a fresh Writ-Petition No. 2404/1989 before the High Court. The present appeal before us arises out of the High Court's order dismissing the said W.P. 2404/1989. The High Court was of the view that the orders made by this Court in the earlier SLPs indicated that this Court had really intended that all the controversies should conclude with the decision of the Minister. The High Court, however, also went into the merits as well and held that there were no grounds to interfere.
10. Sri R.K. Jain, strenuously contended before us that the High Court misdirected itself as to the scope of the proceedings before it on an obviously erroneous view that this Court, while disposing of the earlier SLPs, had precluded any further enquiry into the merits after the Minister's decision. Sri Jain submitted that this Court while disposing of the Special Leave Petitions had merely indicated its disinclination to interfere at that stage and had left the matter to be dealt with under the statute by the Minister which obviously meant that at an appropriate stage when the correctness of the Minister's order came to be assailed the matter would require to be examined on its own merits. It was erroneous to think, contended Sri Jain, that the effect of the orders of this Court was to impart a finality to the Minister's order whatever its vitiating features.
There might be some force in what Sri Jain says if the observations which Sri Jain takes exception to are alone taken into account. The High Court was possibly wrong in its view as to the effect of this Court's earlier orders. But what appears clear is that the High Court also went into the merits of the matter. Therefore the grievance that the High Court abdicated its jurisdiction on an erroneous interpretation of this Court's earlier order may not be correct. However, in order that there be no dissatisfaction on the question that the matter did not receive adequate consideration in the High Court, we asked the appellants to present their case on the merits also so that any need for a remit of the matter to the High Court at this late stage was obviated. Parties placed their case fully before us.
11. Sri Jain raised a number of contentions touching the power of the Municipal Council to make such disposal of Municipal property as was implicit in the scheme and on, what Sri Jain called, a manifest susceptibility of the scheme for arbitrariness in the matter of the choice of the developer. The main thrusts on Sri Jain's argument are, first, that the project, in substance, envisaged a disposal of the property-rights of the Municipal Council in favour of Respondent No. 6 which, in turn, became entitled to further deal with the properties squarely attracting the prohibition Under Section 92 of the Act; and secondly, that the scheme was a wholly non-conventional one unknown to settled principles of public finance. Sri Jain strenuously urged that the non-conventional and unorthodox features of the scheme particularly as to the mode of its finances, were tailored with Respondent 6 in mind and were intended to, and did, confer on Respondent 6 a pre-mediated largesse, in flagrant violation of financial disciplines and morality. It was also urged that the project gave enormous pecuniary advantage to Respondent 6 wholly disproportionate to its outlay of funds on the project.
In the ultimate analysis, the contentions of Sri Jain admit of being formulated thus:
(a) That the scheme of financing of the project was not one that was, as a matter of policy, open and permissible to a Governmental authority. The Municipal authority could either have put-up the construction itself departmentally or awarded the execution of the whole project to a building contractor. The method of financing and execution of the project are, in short, ultra vires of the powers of the Municipal authority under the Act.
(b) That the terms of the agreement with the developer that the latter be at liberty to dispose of the occupancy-rights in the commercial complex in such manner and on such terms as it may choose would amount to an impermissible delegation of the statutory functions of the Municipal Council Under Section 272 of the Act to the developer.
(c) That the project, in effect, amounted to and involved the disposal of Municipal property by way of a long term lease with rights of sub-letting in favour of the developer violative of Section 92 of the 'Act'.
(d) That the scheme is arbitrary and unreasonable and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The project is patently one intended to and does provide for an unjust enrichment of respondent No. 6 at public expense.
We may now deal with these contentions.
12. Re: Contention (a)
The mode of financing of the project is stated to be un-conventional one and does not accord with any recognised or accepted norms of functioning and financial discipline of Governmental bodies. It is urged that the Municipal Council could have engaged a contractor to execute the work against payment in accordance with well accepted procedures for Government contracts or could have executed the works itself departmentally. It is said that the method now chosen for the development involves a policy impermissible for a Government body. This contention of the appellants, as a legal contention is somewhat vague and does not admit of clear-cut legal contours. As we apprehend the contention, it pertains to the legality or propriety of a policy-option. However, reliance was placed on certain observations of this Court in Ramana Dayanand Shetty v. International Airport Authority MANU/SC/0048/1979 : (1979)IILLJ217SC and Kasturilal Laxmi Reddy v. State of J & K MANU/SC/0079/1980 : [1980]3SCR1338 .
In those cases relied this Court pointed out that with the growth of a welfare state and with the Government assuming a pluralist role as provider of social welfare services and with the corresponding increase in the magnitude of the governmental functions and the consequent evolution of new forms of wealth and new forms of property, the scope for conferment of largesse by Government had increased and the discretion of Government in the disposal of such properties, rights or privileges should not be unlimited and arbitrary.
Sri Jain said that in the present case the project involved purely commercial considerations and had had no social objectives and the securing of terms to the best advantage of the Municipal Council should have been the objective. It is urged that the Municipal Council disregarded this criterion and resorted to a method which gave uncontrolled discretion and authority to Respondent 6 to exploit the commercial potential of the property for its own aggrandizement . Sri Jain said that the avowed reason why the Municipal Council did not itself, with all its vast financial resources, undertake the execution of the project was that the Municipal Council wanted to save itself from the difficulties involved in the process. Sri Jain said that if the developer could finance the project by the income received from a disposal of the occupancy-rights and make huge profits, there was no reason why the Municipal Council itself could not have done the same.
13. Sri Singhvi, for the Municipal authority submitted that the execution of the project of this magnitude involved a degree of financial outlay and management expertise well beyond the immediate sources of the Municipal Council and that though the Municipal Council had a budget which indicated crores of rupees on the receipt side, the increasing revenue expenditure and other financial commitments rendered it well-neigh impossible to set-apart the financial inputs requisite for this project. Sri Singhvi said that in the matter of management of the transactions relating to the disposal of occupancy-rights and prompt mobilisation of funds, the deficiencies and limitations of the bureaucratic machinery should not be put out of consideration in assessing the value and utility of the alternatives. Sri Singhvi pointed out that despite the heterogeneity of their political affiliations, the members of the Municipal Council, passed all the resolutions in regard to this project unanimously. Sri Singhvi said that although popular support could not validate an ultra vires action, it might become relevant to the question whether a certain action was reasonable or not and that the circumstance that all the resolutions had been passed unanimously would lend credence to the propriety and wisdom of the measure. Sri Singhvi claimed that the estimates and calculations on which the scheme was worked-out by the Municipal Council would show that the developer would not have any opportunity of making any run-away profits or exploitative gains.
14. On a consideration of the matter, it appears to us that the argument that a project envisaging a self-financing scheme, by reason alone of the particular policy behind it, is beyond the powers of the local authority is somewhat too broadly stated to be acceptable. A project, otherwise legal, does not become any the less permissible by reason alone that the local authority, instead of executing the project itself, had entered into an agreement with a developer for its financing and execution. The criticism of the project being 'unconventional' does not add to or advance the legal contention any further. The question is not whether it is un-conventional by the standard of the extant practices, but whether there was something in the law rendering it impermissible. There is, no doubt, a degree of public accountability in all governmental enterprises. But, the present question is one of the extent and scope of judicial review over such matters. With the expansion of the State's presence in the field of trade and commerce and of the range of economic and commercial enterprises of government and its instrumentalities there is an increasing dimension to governmental concern for stimulating efficiency, keeping costs down, improved management methods, prevention of time and cost over-runs in projects, balancing of costs against time-scales, quality-control, cost-benefit ratios etc. In search of these values it might become necessary to adopt appropriate techniques of management of projects with concomitant economic expediencies. These are essentially matters of economic policy which lack adjudicative disposition, unless they violate constitutional or legal limits on power or have demonstrable pejorative environmental implications or amount to clear abuse of power. This again is the judicial recognition of administrator's right to trial and error, as long as both trial and error are bona fide and within the limits of authority.