MANU/SC/0935/2014
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Interlocutory Application No. 86 of 2014 in Writ Petition (C) No. 435 of 2012 (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Decided On: 14.10.2014
Appellants: Goa Foundation and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI)
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
J.S. Khehar, Jasti Chelameswar and A.K. Sikri, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Pallav Shishodia, Sr. Adv., A.D.N. Rao (A.C.), Prashant Bhushan, Pranav Sachdeva, Rajendra Singhvi, Kaushal K.L. Gautam and Brij Bhushan, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: Atmaram N.S. Nadkarni, AG, S.P. Singh, Sr. Adv., Sukhbeer Kaur Bajwa, Advs., for S.N. Terdal, Siddharth Bhatnagar, Dattaprasad Lawande, Purna Bhandari, Amogh Prabhu Desai, Advs. for T. Mahipal, Adv., for Prafulla R., Head Mines and Bhavani Shankar V. Gadnis, Advs., for A.V. Balan, Advs.
Subject: Commercial
Subject: Mines and Minerals
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 - Rule 27(2), Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 - Rule 31
Cases Referred:
Goa Foundation v. Union of India MANU/SC/0388/2014 : (2014) 5 SCALE 364
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  1

Case Note:

Mines and Minerals - Stay on sale - Release of ore - Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 - Present application filed with prayers to restrain concerned authorities from auctioning mined mineral ore produced by Applicant - Whether prayers made, premised on foundation that Applicant's mined mineral ore could not be sold under orders passed by present Court, were maintainable - Held, there was no statutory provisions under Rules which would favour Applicant - Applicant's submissions were premised merely on assertion that mineral ore had been legitimately mined and therefore, he had absolute and legitimate ownership over same - Present Court categorically directed preparation of inventory of all existing extracted mineral ore available and accordingly, Monitoring Committee prepared such inventory - Then Court further directed sale of that entire extracted ore included by way of e-auction - It was further directed that mining lease holders like Applicant would not be entitled to proceeds of e-auction - Further, on issue of forfeiture of excavated mineral ore, present Court clearly directed that all extracted mineral ore contained in inventory would vest in State Government - Therefore, prayers made by Applicant, either for release of extracted mineral ore to him or liberty to sell same at its own, were unacceptable - No merits in prayer made - Application dismissed. [paras 6, 7 and 8]
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Industry: Mines and Minerals
ORDER
1. Through the instant interlocutory application, the applicant-M/s. Bandekar Brothers Private Limited has prayed for a direction to the concerned authorities for restraining them from auctioning the mined mineral ore produced by the applicant prior to 22.11.2007, through e-auction. This prayer is premised on the foundation, that the applicant's above stated mined mineral ore cannot be sold, under the orders passed by this Court. In this behalf, it was the contention of the learned Counsel for the applicant, that the applicant had mined 67,285 metric tons of iron ore (Grade 63.19% Fe approximately) prior to 22.11.2007, and therefore, the applicant should be released the aforesaid iron ore, with the right to dispose of the same. A similar submission was made by the applicant for the disposal of 1,00,000 metric tons of old dump (grade 46.15% Fe approximately).
2. According to the learned Counsel for the applicant, the mineral ore mined prior to 22.11.2007, cannot be treated as having been illegitimately mined, and as such, the applicant as also all other similarly placed mining lease holders, should be released the same with liberty to sell the same.
3. Mr. A.D.N. Rao, Advocate, learned amicus, vehemently opposes the prayer made on behalf of the applicant. While doing so, he placed reliance on the decision rendered by this Court in Goa Foundation v. Union of India MANU/SC/0388/2014 : (2014) 5 SCALE 364. Our pointed attention was invited to the following observations recorded therein:
67. As we have held that the deemed mining leases of the lessees in Goa expired on 22.11.1987 and the maximum period (20 years) of renewal of the deemed mining leases in Goa has also expired on 22.11.2007, mining by the lessees in Goa after 22.11.2007 was illegal. Hence, the order dated 10.09.2012 of the Government of Goa suspending mining operations in the State of Goa and the order dated 14.09.2012 of the MoEF, Government of India, suspending the environmental clearance granted to the mines in the State of Goa, which have been impugned in the writ petitions in the Bombay High Court, Goa Bench (transferred to this Court and registered as transferred cases) cannot be quashed by this Court. The order dated 10.09.2012 of the Government of Goa and the order dated 14.09.2012 of the MoEF will have to continue till decisions are taken by the State Government to grant fresh leases and decisions are taken by the MoEF to grant fresh environmental clearances for mining projects.
68. On 05.10.2012, this Court while issuing notice in Writ Petition (C) No. 435 of 2012 (Goa Foundation v. Union of India and Ors.) also passed orders that all mining operations in the leases identified in the report of the Justice Shah Commission and transportation of iron ore and manganese ore from those leases, whether lying at the mine-head or stockyards, shall remain suspended. Thereafter on 11.11.2013, this Court passed an order that the inventory of the excavated mineral ores lying in different mines stockyards/jetties/ports in the State of Goa made by the Department of Mines and Geology of the Government of Goa be verified and thereafter the whole of the inventorised mineral ores be sold by e-auction and the sale proceeds (less taxes and royalty) be retained in separate fixed deposits (lease-wise) by the State of Goa till this Court delivers judgment in these matters on the legality of the leases from which the mineral ores were extracted. In our order passed on 11.11.2013, we had also directed that this entire process of verification of the inventory e-auction and deposit of sale proceeds be monitored by a Monitoring Committee appointed by the Court. The Monitoring Committee comprising Dr. U.V. Singh (Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Karnataka), Shri Shaikh Naimuddin (former Member of Central Board of Direct Taxes) and Parimal Rai (Nominee of Govt. of Goa) have in the meanwhile monitored the e-auction. We extract hereinbelow the relevant portion of the interim report dated 12.03.2014 of the Monitoring Committee:
After the two e-auctions, the total ore auctioned is about 1.62 million MT and the total value realized is 260.68 crores approximately. As directed by this Hon'ble Court, the State Government has been requested to maintain separate accounts, lease wise and keep the sale proceeds as fixed deposits in Nationalized Banks.
The process of transportation of ore for export has not yet been initiated because of the storage charges being demanded from the successful bidder by the Marmagoa Port Trust (MPT). As a result, the process of e-auction is likely to slow down. The extent of storage charges demanded is as per Annexure MC III.
69. As we have held that renewal of all the deemed mining leases in the State of Goa had expired on 22.11.2007, the mining lessees will not be entitled to the sale value of the ores sold in caution but they will be entitled to the approximate cost (not actual cost) of the extraction of the ores.....