MANU/SC/0841/2020
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (C) No. 560 of 2020
Decided On: 05.11.2020
Appellants: Gurusimran Singh Narula
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Ashok Bhushan, R. Subhash Reddy and M.R. Shah, JJ.
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Constitution Of India - Article 21
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Atomic Energy (Radiation Processing of Food and Allied Product) Rules, 2012; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 133; Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 32, Constitution of India - Article 47; Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 3, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 8, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 10, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 10(1), Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 10(2), Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 36, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 45, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 69
Cases Referred:
Devika Biswas v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0999/2016; Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji MANU/SC/0002/1951; L. Hirday Narain v. Income Tax Officer, Bareilly MANU/SC/0268/1970; Municipal Council, Ratlam v. Vardichan and Ors. MANU/SC/0171/1980; CESC Ltd. v. Subhash Chandra Bose; Paschim banga Khet Mazdoor Samity v. State of W.B.
Authorities Referred:
The Nature of the Judicial Process
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  4

Mentioned
  2

Case Note:
Civil - Spraying of disinfectants - Directions thereto - Present petition filed for direction to forthwith ban on spraying of all kinds of disinfectants on human beings which was being done supposedly for protecting human beings from Novel Coronavirus disease 2019(Covid-19) - Whether spraying or fumigation of any kind of chemical disinfectants on human beings without approval of relevant ministry was violative of Article 21.

Facts:

The Writ petition filed in the public interest seeking direction to forthwith ban on spraying of all kinds of disinfectants on human beings which is being done supposedly for protecting the human beings from the Novel Coronavirus disease 2019(Covid-19).

Held, while disposing off the petition:

(i) From the pleadings brought on record on behalf of Respondent No. 1, it was clear that although by the advisory by Respondent No. 1, spraying of disinfectant on human body was not recommended but Respondent No. 1 had not taken any further steps in the above context taking any measure either to prevent or regulate the spraying of disinfectant on the human body. [29]

(ii) The Union and the States were taking all measures to contain the pandemic and all mitigating steps but the facts which had been brought on record in this writ petition indicate that in the present case, something more was required to be done by Respondent No. 1 apart from issuing advisory that use of disinfectant on human body is not recommended. When public authorities/organizations were using disinfectants both chemical/organic on the human body and there were various studies to the effect that it may be harmful to the health and the body. Some more actions were required to remove the cloud of uncertainty and to regulate the use even if it was to either prevent such use or regulate the use so that health of citizens was amply protected. [35]

(iii) An additional affidavit has been filed by the Respondent No. 1 where details regarding use of Ultraviolet UV rays disinfectant/sterilize edible food items like fruits and vegetables had been quoted. In additional affidavit, Rules had been relied namely Atomic Energy (Radiation Processing of Food and Allied Product) Rules, 2012, which Rules require that no person shall operate the facility without obtaining a license for radiation processing of food and allied products under the Rules. Facility had been defined as radiation processing facility for food and allied product. There were hosts of regulatory measures of radiation for use of UV rays with regard to food and other articles. For spraying disinfectant on human body, fumigation or use of UV rays against the human body, there had to be regulatory regime when Respondent No. 1 itself was of the view that such use is not recommended. The Respondent No. 1 had wide powers and responsibilities under Act, 2005, which could have been utilized to remedy the situation. In event, use of disinfectant on human body was to cause adverse effect on the health of the people, there had to be immediate remedial action and Respondent No. 1 could not stop only by saying that such use was not recommended. [41]

(iv) The ends of justice be served in disposing the writ petition by issuing the directions that the Respondent No. 1 may consider and issue necessary directions in exercise of powers vested in it under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, regarding ban/Regulation on the usage of disinfection tunnels involving spraying or fumigation of chemical/organic disinfectants for the human beings. There shall be similar consideration and directions by the Respondents with regard to exposure of human being to artificial ultraviolet rays. Looking to the health concern of the people in general, the aforesaid exercise be completed by Respondent No. 1 within a period of one month. [42]

Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
Ashok Bhushan, J.
1. This Writ petition filed in the public interest Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India seeks direction to forthwith ban on spraying of all kinds of disinfectants on human beings which is being done supposedly for protecting the human beings from the Novel Coronavirus disease 2019(Covid-19).
2. The World Health Organisation(WHO) declared novel coronavirus disease, 2019 (hereinafter referred to as Covid-19) as a Pandemic on 11.03.2020. All countries including India after spread of the pandemic had taken and are still taking different measures to contain the disease and protect its citizens from Covid-19. On 29.03.2020, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, released guidelines on disinfection of common Public places including Offices. The scope as contained in the guidelines is to the following effect:
Scope: This document aims to provide interim guidance about the environmental cleaning/decontamination of common public places including offices in areas reporting COVID-19.
Coronavirus Disease 2019(COVID-19) is an acute respiratory disease caused by a novel Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), transmitted in most instances through respiratory droplets, direct contact with cases and also through contaminated surfaces/objects. Though the virus survives on environmental surfaces for varied period of time, it gets easily inactivated by chemical disinfectants...
3. On 18.04.2020, Director General of Health Services (EMR Division), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, issued an advisory against spraying of disinfectants on people for Covid-19 arrangements. Even though in the above advisory, spraying of individuals or groups was not recommended, several bodies, organizations started using spraying tunnels to disinfect the human body. The press release dated 23.4.2020 was issued by National Capital Laboratory(Council for Scientific and Industrial Research) which was joint press release by CSIR-NCL Pune-ICT Mumbai, stating that the use of mist based sanitization is expected to provide safeguard to front-line health care professionals including paramedical staff, police and employees providing essential services. Other public organizations also started using the walk way spray tunnels, and other measures for disinfecting humans at various public places.
4. This writ petition Under Article 32 has been filed on 05.06.2020 praying for following reliefs:
i. Issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order a forthwith ban on the usage, installation, production, advertisement of disinfection tunnels involving spraying or fumigation of chemical disinfectants for the purposes disinfecting human being and/or
ii. Issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order a forthwith ban on usage, installation, production, advertisement of disinfection tunnels involving spraying or fumigation of organic disinfectants for the purposes disinfecting human beings and/or
iii. Issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ, direction or order a forthwith ban on the usage, installation, production, advertisement of disinfection tunnels exposing human beings to ultraviolet rays for the purposes disinfecting them and/or
iv. To pass such other orders and further orders as may be deemed necessary on the facts and in the circumstances of the case
5. The Petitioner in the writ petition referred to and relied the advisory dated 18.04.2020 and has also referred to press release dated 23.04.2020 issued by CSIR-NCL, Pune-ICT, Mumbai, where tunnels for external body surface sanitization of personal walk was recommended.
6. The Petitioner's case in the writ petition is that although the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, has not approved the use of any self claimed organic or ayurvedic disinfectant for spraying or fumigation purposes nor approved any chemical disinfectants on human body but lot of organizations/public authorities are using chemical disinfectants for spraying and fumigation. Several instances in the writ petition of public authorities installing disinfecting tunnel has been given in the writ petition.
7. Publication from World Health Organization has also been relied where it is clearly stated that spraying and introducing bleach or other disinfectant into body will not protect against Covid-19 and can be dangerous. Quoting World Health Organization, it is pleaded that the Ultraviolet (UV Lamps) should not be used to disinfect the hands and other areas of the skin. Reference has also been made of advanced disinfectant tunnel developed jointly by Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur and Artificial Limb Manufacturing Corporation of India.
8. Articles questioning against the use of disinfectant tunnels have also been referred to and relied by the Petitioner. Certain materials where different experts have recommended use of UV light and disinfectant tunnel has also been referred to. sIn view of several discordant note expressed by certain experts and organizations, the writ petition prayed for directions as quoted above.
9. This Court issue notice to Respondent Nos. 1-3 on 10.08.2020. No notice having been issued to the Respondent Nos. 4 to 6, they be deleted from the array of the parties. The Respondent No. 1 has filed a counter affidavit dated 01.09.2020 where advisory dated 18.04.2020 as well as minutes of meeting dated 09.06.2020 held under the chairmanship of Director General Health Services, with regard to review on use of disinfection tunnel using various chemicals and spraying disinfectants have been brought on the record. Taking note of the meeting proceeding dated 09.06.2020 where spraying disinfectant was not recommended by the minutes, This Court passed following order on 07.09.2020:
ORDER
A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of Union of India. In the counter affidavit at page 40 copy of meeting-Annexure 'G' dated 09.06.2020 has been brought on the record, where it has been decided that spraying disinfectants is not recommended. Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General submits that relevant directions and circulars shall be issued to all concerned.
As prayed by Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, list after two weeks.
10. After the aforesaid order, another affidavit titled as 'Compliance affidavit dated 28.09.2020' by Respondent No. 1 where O.M. dated 23.09.2020 has been brought on the record reiterating that spraying of individuals or groups with disinfectant using any modality is not recommended and hence, all States/Union Territories are directed to ensure that such practices are not implemented in the States/UTs.
11. An additional affidavit has also been filed by Respondent No. 1 with regard to use of Ultraviolet (UV) rays to disinfect/sterilize edible items like fruits and vegetables. Petitioner has also filed consolidated rejoinder affidavit. An intervention application has also been filed by one Ideal Flow Pvt. Ltd. which claims to be a company which has developed and designed pressurized steam disinfectant chamber. The applicant submits that in designed pressurized steam disinfectant chamber, natural oils are mixed in an emulsifier solution. Applicant claims that the product has various health benefits. Applicant further submitted that there is a major difference between disinfectant tunnels spraying chemical disinfectant and pressurized disinfection chamber, any blanket ban as sought in the writ petition may seriously impact the business of the applicant, in light of the major difference of the applicant's product from that of disinfection tunnel mentioned in the writ petition.
12. We have heard the Petitioner appearing in person, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General for the Respondents and Smt. Anita Shenoy, Senior Advocate for the intervenor.
13. The Petitioner submits that although the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, the Respondents No. 1 through its advisory dated 18.04.2020 had stated that spraying of disinfectant on human being is not recommended but Union of India has not taken any step to stop use, advertisement and sale of chemical based disinfection tunnels. The Petitioner submits that there is no study anywhere in the world by any credible health agency which states that human disinfection tunnels are effective against Covid-19 virus. On the contrary, there are sufficient health advisories by the WHO, Respondent No. 1 and other international agency that tunnels are counterproductive and harmful for human health. There has been no advisory issued by Respondent No. 1 which recommends usage of any organic solution for spraying on human body against Covid-19 pandemic.
14. The Petitioner submits that in absence of any recommendation of health authorities, there is a trend across the Country where people are producing self-certified so called safe disinfection tunnels with variety of organic solutions. The Petitioner submits that the concept of "human disinfection" through walk in tunnel is flawed and misconceived and be not permitted at any cost in light of Right to Health Under Article 21 of the Constitution.
15. Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, submits that answering Respondent No. 1 had not issued any advisory for usage, installation, production, advertisement of disinfection tunnel involving spraying or fumigation of chemicals/organic disinfectants for the purpose of disinfecting human beings. Learned Solicitor General has referred to advisory dated 18.04.2020 issued by Respondent No. 1. It is further submitted that in the meeting held on 09.06.2020 under the Chairmanship of Director General Health Services, review on use of disinfection tunnel was made and it was reiterated that spraying disinfectant is not recommended in both health care and non-health care settings. Shri Mehta submits that the States/UTs have to implement the guidelines dated 18.04.2020 and the role of the Government of India is limited to providing necessary guidelines and financial support.
16. Learned Counsel for the intervenor has submitted that the product which is being designed by the applicant does not use any chemical as human disinfectant rather it uses natural oil which promotes health. The applicant opposes any blanket ban on the use of such products for human disinfection.
17. We have considered the submission of learned Counsel for the parties and perused the record.
18. The writ petition raises following three questions:
I) Whether spraying or fumigation of any kind of chemical disinfectants on human beings without the approval of the relevant ministry is violative of Article 21?
II) Whether spraying or fumigation of any kind of self-claimed organic disinfectant on human beings without the approval of the relevant Ministry is violative of Article 21?
III) Whether exposure of human beings to artificial ultraviolet rays is violative of Article 21?
All the above questions being inter-connected are being taken together.
19. Article 21 of the Constitution provides for protection of life and personal liberty. The expression 'life' used in Article 21 has wide import and connotation. Article 21 encompasses a bundle of rights which have been recognized from time to time by the legislature of this Country and Courts of this Country including this Court. Right to life as recognized Under Article 21 is Right to live with dignity. Right to health is also recognized as an important facet of Article 21 of the Constitution. We may refer to pronouncement of this Court in Devika Biswas v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0999/2016 : (2016) 10 SCC 726, where this Court held that Right to Health is an integral facet of Right guaranteed Under Article 21 of the Constitution. In paragraph 107 of this Court dealing with Right to Health laid down following:
107. It is well established that the right to life Under Article 21 of the Constitution includes the right to lead a dignified and meaningful life and the right to health is an integral facet of this right. In CESC Ltd. v. Subhash Chandra Bose dealing with the right to health of workers, it was noted that the right to health must be considered an aspect of social justice informed by not only Article 21 of the Constitution, but also the Directive Principles of State Policy and international covenants to which India is a party. Similarly, the bare minimum obligations of the State to ensure the preservation of the right to life and health were enunciated in Paschim banga Khet Mazdoor Samity v. State of W.B.