MANU/SC/0039/2020
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
M.A. No. 965 of 2019 in Civil Appeal No. 12251 of 2018
Decided On: 16.01.2020
Appellants: Hanuman Laxman Aroskar
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud and Hemant Gupta, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Anitha Shenoy, Sr. Adv., Rashmi Nandakumar, Ritwick Dutta, Kanika Sood, Sanjana Thomas, Ayushana Awasthi and Shankar Narayanan, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: K.K. Venugopal, AG, Atmaram N.S. Nadkarni, ASG, Parag P. Tripathi, Sr. Adv., Pratap Venugopal, Surekha Raman, Akhil Abraham Roy, Vijay Valson, Suhasini Sen, S.B. Narayan, S.S. Rebello, Arzu Paul, Neeleshwar Pavani, Shivika Agarwal, Niraj Kumar, Priya Soni, Gurmeet Singh Makker, M.S. Ananth, Mahesh Agarwal, Yojit Mehra, Srinivasan Ramaswamy, Aashna Agarwal and E.C. Agrawala, Advs.
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; Constitution of India - Article 142; Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016; Energy Conservation Building Code; Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986; Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; Indian Forest Act, 1927 - Section 4, Indian Forest Act, 1927 - Section 20; National Building Code of India, 2005; Public Liability (Insurance) Act, 1991; Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000; Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016; Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972
Cases Referred:
Lafarge Umiam Mining Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0735/2011; Hanuman Laxman Aroskar v. Union of India MANU/SC/0444/2019
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.08.2018 of the National Green Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi in Appeal No. 6 of 2018 (earlier Appeal No. 1 of 2016/WZ)
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  2

Case Note:
Environment - Grant of Environmental Clearance - Union of India in Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change moved present proceedings, seeking a direction that, Minutes of fortieth meeting of Expert Appraisal Committee dated 23 April 2019 be taken on record so that, embargo imposed by present Court on Environmental Clearance for a greenfield airport at Mopa Goa could be lifted - Whether concerns which were highlighted in earlier judgment of present Court dated 29 March 2019, had been adequately addressed and remedied.

Facts:

Union of India in Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change moved present proceedings, seeking a direction that, Minutes of fortieth meeting of Expert Appraisal Committee dated 23 April 2019 be taken on record so that, embargo imposed by this Court on Environmental Clearance for a greenfield airport at Mopa Goa could be lifted. This follows upon the judgment dated 23 April 2019 which was rendered on a challenge addressed to this Court against a decision of the National Green Tribunal upholding the EC, subject to compliance with certain conditions. By the judgment of this Court, reported as Hanuman Laxman Aroskar v. Union of India, the process leading up to the grant of an EC on 28 October 2015 was held to be flawed. The essence of the controversy in the present case is whether the concerns which were highlighted in the earlier judgment of this Court dated 29 March 2019, have been adequately addressed and remedied. Learned Senior Counsel appeared on behalf of the Appellant submitted that by the judgment of this Court dated 29 March 2019, the EAC was directed to revisit the EC granted to the project and to decide whether or not the project should be approved. Ms. Shenoy prefaced her submissions with two preliminary points: The composition of the EAC (Infrastructure-2) which has thirteen members does not qualify it as an expert body. None of the members had expertise on ornithology or on terrestrial eco-system. The EAC is chaired by a former Director of the Council for Social Development with retired officers of the State and Central Pollution Control Boards. One of the members has an architectural background, another in chemical engineering while one of the members is a Professor of Law. The minutes do not disclose whether the EAC sought the opinion of a subject specialist or specialized institution; and there is a conflict of interest on the part of the EIA consultant who had prepared the EIA report. As on the date of EAC meeting, Engineers India Limited was the EIA consultant as well as an independent engineer on the project. The EAC minutes recorded that the project proponent and EIL made a detailed presentation on the observations of this Court with comments and responses. EIL was defending its actions as an EIA consultant while at the same time being an independent engineer for the construction of the airport. This involves a conflict of interest.

Held, while lifting imposed embargo on Environmental Clearance

1. The EAC has a vital role in conducting the appraisal of proposed projects in terms of their environmental impact and consequences. The EAC is intended to be an expert body. The members of the EAC are expected to bring to the deliberations of the body their knowledge and domain expertise. The composition of the EAC indicates that it comprises of experts with a scientific background as well as persons having domain knowledge on matters pertaining to the environment. Among the members of the EAC were persons who had a background of service in the State and Central Pollution Control Boards, the Indian Forest Service, MoEF-CC and the National Institute of Ocean Technology. The constitution of the Committee cannot be faulted on the ground that as a body, the EAC lacked domain expertise. As a Committee which deals with infrastructure projects, the body as constituted also comprises of persons with relevant background and experience. Ultimately, the legitimacy of the decision which has been arrived at by the EAC will be assessed during the course of the judgment. Challenge that the members of the EAC lacked domain expertise cannot be accepted. [24]

2. It is necessary to emphasis two facets: First, under Clause 4 (vii) of the order dated 7 January 2019 constituting the EAC, the chairperson is empowered to co-opt an expert as a member for a particular meeting of the Committee. Infrastructure projects which the EAC is called upon to assess and appraise do not fall into one specific mould. Hence, the EAC should engage with the enabling provision which has been made in Clause 4 (vii) to co-opt experts. The exercise of this enabling discretion will facilitate the work of the EAC by allowing for the benefit of the knowledge and expertise of an expert in a particular subject area being made available to it. The failure to co-opt an expert does not, as a consequence, lead to the invalidation of the exercise conducted by the EAC. But the desirability of co-opting experts needs to be underscored so as to bring a diversity of experience in the work of the EAC. Second, the composition of the EAC is dominated in a large measure by retired officials drawn from the Pollution Control Boards in the Centre and State and from former officials of the MoEF-CC. In the composition of the EAC, the Union Government should travel beyond former officials of the Pollution Control Boards and Ministries. Without disparaging their credentials or their experience, it is nonetheless desirable that the members of the EAC should comprise of a cross Section of persons drawn from different specialties having a bearing on environmental protection. Where the EAC has to deal with infrastructure projects, it is necessary to include persons who are familiar with the need for a balanced growth of infrastructure consistent with environmental protection. [25]

3. Present Court strongly commend to the Union Government the need to ensure in the composition of the EAC the inclusion of persons with specialized knowledge of diverse disciplines in relation to environmental protection. The challenge to the minutes of the 23 April 2019 must be addressed on merits, there being no reasonable basis for this Court to conclude that the EAC lacked the expertise to make its recommendations. [26]

4. The second preliminary point that was urged by Ms. Shenoy was of a conflict of interest in the role and position of EIL as an EIA consultant as well as an independent engineer for the project. The Attorney General for India in his written note of submissions on behalf of the State of Goa has submitted that EIL was appointed as a consultant for preparing the EIA report in 2012. The assignment of EIL concluded upon the issuance of an EC by MoEF-CC on 28 October 2015. Thereafter, the Government of Goa floated a tender for the appointment of an independent engineer to supervise the work of construction in 2017. EIL secured the bid and came on board as an independent engineer in December 2017. After the judgment of this Court dated 29 March 2019 by which the EAC was directed to revisit the EC conditions, the Government of Goa sought the assistance of EIL which was the author of the EIA report in presenting its case before the EAC. Hence, from the facts which have been set-forth before the Court by the learned Attorney General, it becomes clear that EIL was appointed as an independent engineer for the project only after the EC had been granted on 28 October 2015 and in a competitive tendering process. The role of the independent engineer is to supervise the construction of the airport in accordance with the ICAO standards. Certification and licensing of the airport is in the domain of the Director General of Civil Aviation of the Government of India. Compliance with environmental conditions contained in the EC is monitored by the regional office of the MoEF-CC at Bengaluru. Moreover, there is merit in the submission which was urged by Ms. ANS Nadkarni, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the MoEF-CC that the decision in regard to the grant of an EC rests with MoEF-CC. The fact that EIL whose services were engaged as an EIA consultant was subsequently appointed as an independent engineer after the initial grant of an EC will not result in the invalidation of the EC. [27]

5. The Airport Guidance Manual published by MoEF in February 2010 contains significant points for guidance having a bearing on the controversy which has been raised in the present case. [43]

6. A comprehensive process has been followed by the EAC bearing in mind the requirements of the Airport Guidance Manual. The EAC took note of the presence of reserved forests and of ESAs in the Western Ghats and deliberated on the impact of the construction and operation of the proposed airport on flora or fauna, hydrological systems and climatic variations. The process which has been adopted by the EAC and its ultimate conclusions must be scrutinized, in the course of judicial review, in the context of the limitations which are attached to the court conducting a merits based review. [44]

7. The evaluation of merits is a matter which primarily rests with an expert authority. The court can certainly supervise procedural compliance and ensure that all necessary inputs which are required to be factored into the decision-making process have been duly borne in mind. Once this has been done, the court must be circumspect in micro-managing the decision-making process by the EAC by substituting its own opinion for that of the EAC. Undoubtedly, no process can be perfect or free from studied criticism. By the judgment of this Court dated 29 March 2019, the EAC was required to carry out the exercise within a period of one month from the receipt of the order of this Court. The Court did not quash the EC but directed that it should remain under suspension until the EAC revisited its recommendations in the light of the concerns which were expressed by this Court. Having assessed the process which took place following the judgment of this Court and the outcome, it would be difficult for this Court to hold that it fails to meet the standards which the court applies in the course of judicial review in environmental matters. [45]

8. Present Court has also taken note of the assurance which has been tendered on behalf of the concessionaire that it will adopt a Zero Carbon Programme both in the construction and operational phases of the airport. Present Court accepts the undertaking of the concessionaire and issue a direction for compliance. [47]

9. The earlier judgment of this Court highlighted numerous deficiencies by the project proponent leading to the grant of the EC. This Court highlighted numerous concerns including the preservation of forests, the existence of ESAs with their attendant features and the impact of the proposed project on natural water channels. The Court also noted the abject failure of the project proponent to provide complete information on the existence of reserved forests. In the proceedings that followed the judgment of this Court, the project proponent sought to remedy its failure by taking into account additional information on significant aspects of the environment. In the process leading to the grant of the EC as well as the lifting of its suspension by this Court, numerous mitigatory conditions have been imposed on the project proponent. Present Court deems it appropriate to ensure the oversight of the project by a specialized body to ensure compliance with the directions cumulatively issued by this Court. National Environmental Engineering Research Institute is to be appointed to oversee compliance with the directions cumulatively issued by this Court. The project proponent shall bear the costs, expenses and fees of NEERI. [48]

10. The suspension on the EC shall accordingly stand lifted. [49]

Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
INDEX
A.
Introduction
B.
Appraisal by the EAC
  B.1
Zero-Carbon programme
C.
Genesis of the proposed airport
D.
The present challenge
  D.1
Domain Expertise of the EAC
  D.2
Conflict of interest
  D.3
Western Ghats and ESAs
  D.4
Forestland and flora and fauna
E.
Directions
A. Introduction
1. The Union of India in the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change1 moved these proceedings, seeking a direction that the Minutes of the fortieth meeting of the Expert Appraisal Committee2 dated 23 April 2019 be taken on the record so that the embargo imposed by this Court on the Environmental Clearance3 for a greenfield airport at Mopa Goa can be lifted. This follows upon the judgment dated 23 April 2019 which was rendered on a challenge addressed to this Court against a decision of the National Green Tribunal4 upholding the EC, subject to compliance with certain conditions. By the judgment of this Court, reported as Hanuman Laxman Aroskar v. Union of India MANU/SC/0444/2019, the process leading up to the grant of an EC on 28 October 2015 was held to be flawed. The directions that were imposed by the Court were formulated in the following terms:
175. ...
(i) The EAC shall revisit the recommendations made by it for the grant of an EC, including the conditions which it has formulated, having regard to the specific concerns which have been highlighted in this judgment;
(ii) The EAC shall carry out the exercise under (i) above within a period of one month of the receipt of a certified copy of this order;
(iii) Until the EAC carries out the fresh exercise as directed above, the EC granted by the MoEFCC on 28 October 2015 shall remain suspended;
(iv) Upon reconsidering the matter in terms of the present directions, the EAC, if it allows the construction to proceed will impose such additional conditions which in its expert view will adequately protect the concerns about the terrestrial eco systems noticed in this judgment. The EAC would be at liberty to lay down appropriate conditions concerning air, water, noise, land, biological and socio-economic environment;
(v) The EAC shall have due regard to the assurance furnished by the concessionaire to this Court that it is willing to adopt and implement necessary safeguards bearing in mind international best practices governing greenfield airports;
(vi) We grant liberty to the State of Goa as the project proponent and the MoEFCC, as the case may be, to file the report of the EAC before this Court in the form of a Miscellaneous Application so as to facilitate the passing of appropriate orders in the proceedings; and
(vii) No other Court or Tribunal shall entertain any challenge to the report that is to be submitted before this Court by the EAC in compliance with the present order.