MANU/SC/5541/2006
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 5721 of 2006 (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 15035 of 2006)
Decided On: 12.12.2006
Appellants: Hasham Abbas Sayyad
Vs.
Respondent: Usman Abbas Sayyad and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and Markandey Katju, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Makarand D. Adkar, Vijay Kumar and Vishwajit Singh, Advs
For Respodents/Defendant: R.K. Garg, Ashish Garg and Annam D.N. Rao, Advs. for Respondents 1 and 2 and Suruchi Aggarwal, Advs. for Respondent No. 3
Subject: Civil
Subject: Property
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872 - Section 54
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 144; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 2(2); Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 21; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 54; Constitution Of India - Article 142
Cases Referred:
Rachakonda Venkat Rao and Ors. v. R. Satya Bai (Dead) by L.Rs. and Anr. MANU/SC/0702/2003; Shankar Balwant Lokhande (Dead) v. Chandrakant Shankar Lokhande and Anr. MANU/SC/0243/1995; W.B. Essential Commodities Supply Corporation v. Swadesh Agro Farming & Storage Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. MANU/SC/0568/1999; Hameed Joharan (Dead) and Ors. v. Abdul Salam (Dead) by Lrs. and Ors. MANU/SC/0444/2001; Mool Chand and Ors. v. Dy. Director, Consolidation and Ors. MANU/SC/0507/1995; Dr. Chiranji Lal (D) by LRs. v. Hari Das (D) by LRs. MANU/SC/0396/2005; Chief Justice of Andhra Pradesh and Anr. v. L.V.A. Dikshitulu and Ors. MANU/SC/0416/1978; MD Army Welfare Housing Organisation v. Sumangal Services (P) Ltd.MANU/SC/0797/2003; Harshad Chiman Lal Modi v. DLF Universal Ltd. and Anr. MANU/SC/0710/2005; Zila Sahakari Kendrya Bank Maryadit v. Shahjadi Begum and Ors. MANU/SC/8536/2006; Shahbad Co-op. Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Special Secretary to Govt. of Haryana and Ors. MANU/SC/8650/2006; Bombay Dyeing and Mfg. Co. Ltd. Ltd. v. Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors. MANU/SC/1197/2006; Kishori Lal v. Sales Officer, District Land Development Bank and Ors. MANU/SC/8450/2006
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 18.7.2006 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 4438/2006
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:



Dissented
  6

Mentioned
  6

Relied On
  1

Case Note:
(1) Constitution of India - Article 142--Code of Civil Procedure, 1908--Sections 2 (2) and 54, Order XXI and Order XXVI, Rules 13 and 14--Suit for partition--Property impartible--Preliminary decree--Whether property can be put to auction without final decree?--Held, "no"--Order XXI, provides that property can be put to sale only in execution of decree--Only final decree and not preliminary decree can be put to execution--However, with a view to doing complete justice to parties, under Article 142, direction to appellant to deposit Rs. 18 lakhs with trial Judge--And also interest by way of compensation @ 9% p.a.--Respondents 2 and 3 to be allowed to withdraw Rs. 9 lakhs each--On compliance, auction to stand set aside--And decree of partition satisfied.

(2) Jurisdiction--Order passed by person lacking inherent jurisdiction--Is nullity--Principles of estoppel, waiver and acquiescence or even res judicata being procedural in nature--Not to have any application in such case--Order passed by Court without jurisdiction--Would be coram non judice being nullity--Same ordinarily should not be given effect to.
Ratio Decidendi:
"It is final decree proceeding and not preliminary decree which would be executable in nature."

"Any order passed by a Court without jurisdiction would be coram non judice being a nullity and principles of estoppel, waiver and acquiescence or even res judicata which are procedural in nature would have no application in a case where an order has been passed by Tribunal/Court which has no authority in that behalf."
Case Category:
PERSONAL LAW MATTERS - MATTERS RELATING TO PARTITION
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. Appellant, Respondent No. 1 and Respondent No. 2 are brothers. A suit for partition was filed by Respondent No. 1. A preliminary decree was passed on 16.03.1999. An application purported to be a Special Darkhast was filed by him on 29.11.1999. An Advocate Commissioner was appointed. He was of the opinion that the property was impartible. A proposal was mooted that the property be put on sale in between the co- sharers. Appellant accepted the Commissioner's report. He however filed an application for putting the said suit property on auction sale and for equal distribution of the proceeds thereof amongst the co-sharers. An objection to the report of the said Advocate Commissioner was filed by the appellant. The court allowed the appellant to appoint an architect at his own cost. He, however, failed to comply with the said order. A sale proclamation was issued. The appellant expressed his intention to buy the said property at the valuation made by the Government Valuer. A valuation report was filed by the appellant on 04.05.2005 against which Respondent No. 1 filed an objection. The appellant was called upon to deposit 2/3rd of the amount stated in the valuation report. He failed to do so. On or about 21.11.2005, he filed an application expressing his willingness to deposit shares of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2. He also sought for permission to deposit an amount of Rs. 2.5 lakhs. By an order dated 22.11.2005, the Trial Court held that since the property was put on auction sale, the highest bid would be treated to be the best price of the suit property and there was no need for appointment of any valuer to ascertain the market price thereof. Another objection was filed by the appellant stating that in view of the facts and circumstances of the case, he should be allowed to buy the shares of other so-sharers. The said application was rejected by an order dated 14.12.2005. By an order dated 15.04.2006, the learned Trial Judge held that it was not necessary to initiate a final decree proceeding and the said purported Special Darkhast filed by Respondent No. 1 was treated to be an application therefore. A writ petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by the High Court by reason of the impugned order.
The short question which, inter alia, arises for consideration is as to whether the property in suit could be put on auction sale without initiating a formal final decree proceeding.
3. "Decree" has been defined in Section 2(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to mean:
"Decree" means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the Court expressing it, conclusively determines the rights of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or final, it shall be deemed to include the rejection of a plaint and the determination of any question within Section 144, but shall not include -
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an order, or
(b) any order of dismissal for default.
Explanation.- A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before the suit can be completely disposed of. It is final when such adjudication completely disposes of the suit. It may be partly preliminary and partly final;
We may also notice Section 54 of the Code of Civil Procedure which is in the following terms:
54. Partition of estate or separation of share.- Where the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government, or for the separate possession of a share of such an estate the partition of the estate or the separation of the share shall be made by the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to the partition, or the separate possession of shares, of such estates.
4. Order XX of the Code of Civil Procedure provides as to when a judgment is said to be pronounced. Rule 7 thereof provides that a decree although prepared at a later date shall relate back to the date of the judgment. A Civil Court, in a suit for partition, may pass a preliminary decree in terms of Order XX Rule 18 of the Civil Procedure Code, which reads as under:
18. Decree in suit for partition of property or separate possession of a share therein.- Where the Court passes a decree for the partition of property or for the separate possession of a share therein, then, -
(1) if in so far as the decree relates to an estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government, the decree shall declare the rights of the several parties interested in the property, but shall direct such partition or separation to be made by the Collector, or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance with such declaration and with the provisions of Section 54.
(2) if and in so far as such decree relates to any other Immovable property or to movable property, the Court may, if the partition or separation cannot be conveniently made without further inquiry, pass a preliminary decree declaring the rights of the several parties, interested in the property and giving such further directions as may be required.
Preliminary decree declares the rights and liabilities of the parties. However, in a given case a decree may be both preliminary and final. There can be more than one final decrees. A decree may be partly preliminary and partly final. [See Rachakonda Venkat Rao and Ors. v. R. Satya Bai (Dead) by L.Rs. and Anr. MANU/SC/0702/2003 : AIR2003SC3322 ]
5. A final decree proceeding may be initiated at any point of time. No limitation is provided therefore. However, what can be executed is a final decree, and not a preliminary decree, unless and until final decree is a part of the preliminary decree.