MANU/SC/0337/2004
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 4725, 4726-27, 4728, 4729, 4730-31, 4732-47, 4748-49, 4750-51, 4752-4807, 4808-4809, 5319 and 7206 of 2002 and 7109 of 2003 and SLP (c) Nos. 5115-17 of 2002
Decided On: 13.04.2004
Appellants:Hira Tikkoo
Vs.
Respondent:Union Territory, Chandigarh and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Shivaraj V. Patil and D.M. Dharmadhikari, JJ.
Counsels:
M.L. Verma, Rakesh Dwivedi and M.N. Krishnamani, Sr. Advs., Sudhir Nandrajog, Nikhil Nayyar, Manoj Swarup, Nidhi Aggarwal, M.K. Dua, Arvind Minocha, Kamini Jaiswal, Inklee Barooah, Shomila Bakshi and Anil Khetrapal, Advs., S.K. Mishra, Adv. for Debasis Misra, Adv., B.V. Balaram Das, P. Parmeswaran, M.G. Kapoor, Bharat Sangal, S.M. Sarin and P.N. Puri, Advs., R.K. Kapoor, Adv. for Anis Ahmed Khan, Adv., Jagjit Singh Chhabra, Rameshwar Prasad Goyal, Ramesh Babu M.R., Pinky Anand, D.N. Goburdhan, Geeta Luthra, Rajesh Ranjan, Naresh Kaushik, Lalita Kaushik, Shilpa Chohan and Jatin Zaveri, Advs. for the appearing parties
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CAPITAL OF PUNJAB (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1952 - SECTION 3; CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - ARTICLE 14
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14
Cases Referred:
Jit Ram Shiv Kumar and Ors. v. State of Haryana and Ors., MANU/SC/0335/1980; Union of India v. Inod-Afgan Agencies Ltd., 1968 (2) SCR 366; Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. (P) Ltd. v. State of U.P., MANU/SC/0336/1978; M. Ramanatha Pillai v. The State of Kerala and Anr., MANU/SC/0048/1973; State of Kerala and Anr. v. The Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing (WVG.) Co. Ltd. Etc., MANU/SC/0068/1973
Authorities Referred:
Administrative Law by H.W.R. Wade & C.F. Forsyth, Eight Edition; Judicial Review of Administration Action by De Smith, Woolf and Jowell, 5th Edition
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.8.2001 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in C.W.P. No. 717 of 1997
Disposition:
Disposed of
Citing Reference:

Mentioned
  2

Relied On
  3

Case Note:
Civil - Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952 - Section 3 and 3(12) - Chandigarh Lease Hold of Sites and Building Rules, 1973 - Rules 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12(2) and 13 - Advertisement for allotment of industrial plots by administration of UTC - Direction for deposit of 25% of total costs of plots to 339 allottees - Possession given to 57 allottees - Non grant of industrial plots to 254 allottees due to land being declared as part of reserved forest - Challenged by allottees - Framing of new industrial policy accommodating 250 allottees by reducing size of plot - Consent given by some allottees - However other allottees challenging action of Administration of UTC - High Court directing grant of alternative plots to allottees - Non grant of plots as alternative plots falling within restricted zone for Air force base - Contention that on execution of lease deeds, payment of price and formal delivery of possession of the plots, a vested right in law in the plots allotted had been created in favour of the allottees regardless of their consent or non-consent for alternative plots, held unsustainable - When a scheme of development of land and allotment made there under are found to be in contravention of any law and contrary to general public interest, no claim based on so called vested right can be countenanced - Since no citizen can be allowed to claim any vested right which results in violation of statutory provision of law or constitution, claim based on vested right held unsustainable
civil - Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952 - Section 3 and 3(12) - Chandigarh Lease Hold of Sites and Building Rules, 1973 - Rules 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 12(2) and 13 - Doctrines of "Promissory estoppel" and "legitimate expectation" - Applicability of - Advertisement for allotment of industrial plots by administration of UTC - Possession given to 57 allottees - Non grant of industrial plots to 254 allottees due to land being declared as part of reserved forest - Non grant of plots as alternative plots falling within restricted zone for Air force base - Challenged by allottees on ground of applicability of Doctrines of "Promissory estoppel" and "legitimate expectation" -Validity - Where public interest is likely to be harmed, neither doctrine of "legitimate expectation" nor "estoppel" can be allowed to be pressed into service by any citizen against state authorities - Undoubtedly administration was guilty of gross mistake in including in its development scheme, a portion of land covered by forest and land with restrictions under Air crafts Act - However doctrine of estoppel and legitimate expectation cannot be applied against administration to compel it to allot original plots as it would amount to violation of statute intended to conserve forests and restrictions imposed in interests of general public and security of nation under Air crafts Act - When a party or citizen has relied, to his detriment, on an erroneous representation made by public authorities and suffered loss and where doctrine of 'estoppel' could not be invoked to his aid, directing administrative redressal would be a more appropriate remedy than payment of monetary compensation for the loss caused by non-delivery of the possession of the plots - Direction of High Court to extent of charging price from consentees as prevailing on date of draw of lots set aside and substituted with the directions that the consentees on being allotted a particular plot of smaller size to be charged the same price which was prevailing at the time of original allotment of the plot - Directions of High Court partly maintained with modifications, substitution and addition of directions
JUDGMENT
D.M. Dharmadhikari, J.
1. These appeals and special leave petitions are preferred against the common judgment dated 30.8.2001 passed by the Division Bench of High Court of Punjab & Haryana whereby a batch of writ petitions preferred by the applicants for allotment of industrial plots in the development scheme framed by the Union Territory, Chandigarh [shortly referred to as UTC] has been disposed of with certain directions. Different Classes of allottees of industrial plots and UTC all feel aggrieved by the judgment of the High court and are before this court.
2. The full factual background leading to the dispute inter se between the applicants for industrial plots and UTC is required to be set out :-
With a view to re-enact and modify the law in relation to the development and regulation of the new capital of Punjab at Chandigarh, Legislation by name Capital of Punjab [Development and Regulation] Act, 1952 [shortly referred to as the Act] was passed in the year 1952 vesting the State Government with legal authority to regulate the sale of building sites. In exercise of powers under the Act, rules for allotment of sites for building have been framed known as the Chandigarh Lease Hold of Sites and Building Rules, 1973 [hereinafter referred to as the Rules], which among others provide that the Administration of UTC, may demise 'sites for industries and buildings by allotment or auction.
3. In accordance with the provisions of the Act and Rules mentioned above, the Administration of UTC issued an advertisement No. 1/81 on 14.4.1981 inviting applications from interested entrepreneurs seeking allotment of the industrial plots of different sizes ranging from 10 marlas to 4 kanals. Pursuant to the said advertisement, 3735 applications were received from different parties. The Screening Committee of the Administration of UTC on 16.7.1982 short-listed 339 parties for allotment of industrial plots of different sizes after studying their project reports and conducting interviews. The 339 successful applicants, selected for allotment of plots of different sizes, were directed to deposit 25% of the total cost of the plots. On 30.11.1982, for allotting specific plots, a draw of lots was held among 339 successful allottees. As a result of the draw of lots, 57 parties were given possession of their plots in developed industrial areas i.e. Phase-I and Phase-II. Twenty one parties took refund of their money. Seven allottees were given option for change of their plots. Remaining 254 allottees could not be given possession of the plots, allotted to them, as there were objections from the State Authorities to the industrial development of the land it being covered by the notification, issued in the year 1961, declaring area of the land as reserved forest. The Administration of UTC could not deliver the possession of that land which was covered in the reserved forest, to 254 allottees of the year 1989 but it continued to accept the yearly installments fixed for payment from the selected allottees.
4. Certain allottees filed writ petitions the year 1987 in the High Court seeking directions to the Administration of UTC to deliver possession of the industrial plots allotted to them in accordance with the short-listing done by the Screening Committee and consequent draw of lots.
5. On 29.11.1990, the Director of Industries, Government of India, intimated to the allottees that the Administration of UTC was not in a position to deliver possession of the industrial plots allotted to them as the land was found to be a part of reserved forest. The Administration proposed to allot one kanal land to each allottee irrespective of the size of plot originally allotted.
6. On 10.12.1990, the Administration of UTC then framed a now industrial policy to accommodate 250 allottees of 1982 who could not be given possession of the industrial plots because of the land being reserved for forest. To meet aforesaid difficult situation, the Administration decided to reduce the size of 4 kanal and 2 kanal of industrial plots by 25% so as to accommodate and to enable itself to allot plots to all 254 allottees. In view of the new industrial policy of 1990, the earlier letter dated 29.11.1990 proposing each allottee one kanal of plot was withdrawn. On 05.2.1991, a letter was issued to allottees of plots measuring 4 kanal and 2 kanal to give their consent for accepting reduced size of plot" by 25% of the original plot allotted to each of them. The option was invited within a period of 30 days. No option was asked from the allottees of plots measuring one kanal and 10 marlas.
7. Some allottees had given their consent who shall be hereinafter referred to shortly as 'the absentees'.
8. Many others who did not give their consent for reduced size of plots challenged the action of the Administration of UTC in the High Court. The new declared industrial policy of 1990 was also challenged. Such allottees who did not give consent for smaller sizes of plots and approached the High Court shall be, hereinafter, referred to as the non-consenters'. These non-consentees in the petitions filed by them in the High Court obtained stay against the draw of lots scheduled to be held on 27.3.1991 for allotment of specific plots of smaller sizes to the consentees. The non-consentees made a three-pronged attack in the writ petitions by challenging the notification of declaring the area as reserved forest; the new industrial policy of 1990 and the decision to/reduce the size of plots taken by the Administration of UTC. A single Judge of the High Court by order dated 15.11.1991 dismissed the writ petitions filed by the non-consentees. But as the Administration of UTC was found to be blameworthy for the situation created, the learned single Judge merely expressed a wish that they would be accommodated in the alternative schemes. After decision of the case by the single Judge of the High Court, the Administration of UTC on 07.2.1992 issued a letter asking all the 254 allottees to furnish an affidavit in prescribed form indicating that none of them possessed any industrial plot in the territory of Chandigarh, Panchkula or meters-would in his/her name or in the name of his/her spouses/children. This affidavit was demanded in terms of the new industrial policy of 1990. Out of 254 allottees only 161 consentees gave their affidavits. Some of the non-consentees again approached the High Court challenging the new industrial policy of 1990 by filing fresh petitions and others filed letters patent appeals. In their petitions and appeals, they insisted on grant of relief of directing delivery of possession of the original plots allotted to them. The filing of this petition and appeals resulted in stalling the allotments of alternative plots pursuant to the new Industrial policy of 1990 even to consentees who had agreed for plots of reduced sizes at alternative locations and had filed affidavits in the requisite form. The consentees approached the High Court with a prayer that the Administration be directed to give them possession of the alternative plots of smaller sizes. The Division Bench of the High Court passed an order dated 22.11.1994 and by modifying its earlier order dated 13.1.1992 clarified that the Administration of UTC can proceed to allot the industrial plots to consentees subject to the condition that the plots of the size allotted to the non-consentees, who are in litigation, shall be kept reserved and not reduced. Despite the above modification and clarification made by the High Court, the Administration of UTC did not deliver possession of the plots even to consentees stating that in some other cases, stay orders against the allotments were operating against the Administration. On 12.8.1995, the High Court again modified its earlier orders and gave liberty to the Administration to give possession of alternative plots to, consentees. Despite the above order, the Administration of UTC did not choose to deliver possession of the alternative plots even to consentees as In their view, the interim orders of the High Court restrained them from reducing the size of plots allotted to non-consentees.
9. The consentees then approached by substantive petitions before the High Court seeking relief in their favour of issuing direction to the Administration of UTC to deliver possession of alternative plots to them. In response to the writ petitions filed by consentees, the Administration expressed its inability to deliver possession of the plots even to consentees. It was stated that some part of the land to be allotted as alternative plots falls within the restricted zone under the notification Issued under the Aircrafts Act for Air-Force base.
10. The Division Bench of the High Court, after long drawn hearing and detailed consideration of the competing claims of consentees and non-consentees as also the stand of the Administration, passed a common judgment with the directions which are subject matter of these appeals preferred by non-consentees who are aggrieved by denial to them of alternative plots. Consentees feel aggrieved by direction permitting from them demand of the price at the rate prevailing on the date of draw of lots i.e. 27.3.1991. According to the Chandigarh Administration, during long pendency of litigation, a new industrial policy of 2001 has been promulgated in which one phase of industrial area is to be reserved for setting up the Information Technology industries. The Administration is aggrieved by the directions permitting them to charge price only at the rate prevailing on the date of draw of lots i.e. 27.3.1991 and not at current rate.
11. Amongst the consentees and non-consentees, there are individuals and parties who did not file any writ petitions in the High Court and as the relief granted is restricted to the parties before the court, such parties and individuals have filed applications seeking intervention and/or impleadment as parties In this group of appeals.
12. The directions given by the High Court in the impugned judgment are as under :-
1. The prayer of the appellants/petitioners for directing the authorities of Chandigarh Administration to hand over possession of the plots allotted on the basis of draw held in November, 1982 is rejected.
2. However, the authorities of Chandigarh Administration are directed to issue allotment letters to those appellants/petitioners who had given consent for allotment of alternative plots of smaller sizes and who were successful in the draw held on 27.3.1991. They should be charged price at the rate prevailing on the date of draw.
3. Those who were declared successful in the draw held on 27.3.1991 but cannot be allotted plots due to non-availability of sufficient land in the wake of prohibition imposed vide notification dated 5.1.1983 shall be allotted plots in any other scheme already framed or which may be framed hereafter by Chandigarh Administration.
4. Those who were declared successful in the draw held in 1982, but did not give consent for allotment of alternative plots shall be refunded the amount deposited by them with interest at the rate of 12% from the date of deposit till the date of actual payment.
5. Within one month from the date of receipt of this order, Chandigarh Administration shall get published in the Tribune the list of the applicants who had given consent for allotment of alternative plots and were declared successful in the draw field on 27.3.1991 specifying the number of plots earmarked for them.
6. Notification dated 28.4.2000 is held inapplicable and inoperative qua the allotments made to the appellants/petitioners on the basis of the draw held on 27.3.1991.
................
13. In this Court when the arguments commenced, it was felt by all parties involved as also by this Court that some amicable solution reasonably acceptable to all the parties can be found out on the basis of mutual discussions and negotiations between the authorities of the Chandigarh Administration, the contesting consentees and non-consentees.
14. Despite giving them repeated opportunities to settle the matter through negotiations, we are unhappy to record that the counsel for the parties reported that efforts to amiably solve the issue have failed.
15. Learned senior counsel Shri M.L. Verma appearing for the non-consentees very fairly stated that the notification reserving certain lands for the forest and the restrictions imposed on construction In. periphery of 900 metres from the Air-Force base under the Aircrafts Act cannot be questioned and that part of the judgment of the High Court is not being assailed in these appeals. With regard to the restrictions under Aircrafts Act, it is however, pointed out that the period of restriction under notification dated 22,5.2001 has expired and therefore, the said restriction of 900 metres under the Aircrafts Act is no longer in operation.
16. Learned counsel appearing for the Administration of UTC had pointed out to us that the contents of the letter dated 20.11.2003 received by the Administration from Ministry of Defence, Government of India do show that the period of notification imposing restriction has expired but it has been intimated in the same letter that the similar restriction is under contemplation and a fresh notification imposing same is likely to be issued in future-. In the aforesaid circumstances, learned counsel for the Chandigarh Administration submitted that allotment of alternative plots within 900 metres-would be subject to any imposition of restriction under the Aircrafts Act and if such restrictions are imposed, the allottees of plots falling in that area would have no right to claim any compensation or damage from the Administration.
17. We shall take up first for consideration the grievances raised and the challenges made to the directions of the High Court by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the non-consentees. On their behalf, learned counsel states that amongst them are large number of allottees on having been only given letter of allotment, have paid fun price of the plots. Lease-deeds have been executed in their favour and they have been placed in formal possession of the plots although they have not been allowed to take physical possession and raise super-structures. Such allottees, it is contended, have acquired a vested right to obtain the plots. Reliance is placed on section 3(3) of the Act read with rules 4, 6 & 10 of the Rules which read as under :-
"Section 3, Power of Central Government in respect of transfer of land and building in Chandigarh. - (1).............
(2) .................
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, until the entire consideration money together with interest or any other amount, if any, due to the Central Government on account of the transfer of any site or building, or both, under Sub-section (12) is paid, such site or building, or both, as the case may be, shall continue to belong to the Central Government.
Rule 4. The Chandigarh Administration may demise sites and buildings at Chandigarh on lease for 99 years. Such leases may be given by allotment or by auction in accordance with these rules.
Rule 6. Commencement and period of lease. - The lease shall commence from the date of allotment or auction, as the case may be, and shall be for a period of 99 years. After the expiry of the said period of 99 years, the lease may be renewed for such further period and on such terms and conditions as the Government may decide.
Rule 10. Delivery of possession. - Actual possession of the site/building shall be delivered to the lessee on payment of 25 per cent of the premium in accordance with rule 8 or rule 9 as the case may be.
Provided that no ground rent payable under rule 13 and interest on the installments of premium payable under Sub-rule (2) of rule 12 shall be paid by the lessee till the actual and physical possession of the site/building is delivered or offered to be delivered to him, whichever is earlier.
18. Some decisions, which need not detain us for consideration, were cited to contend that on execution of lease-deads, payment of price and formal delivery of possession of the plots, a vested right in law in the plots allotted has been created in favour of the allottees regardless of their consent or non-consent for alternative plots. .
19. We have examined the scheme and provisions of the Act and the Rules. They do not seem to contemplate creation of any vested right where any other state or central legislation bars use of a particular land for industrial development. The Chandigarh Administration, in these cases, had prepared a scheme, carved out plots, auctioned them and received part or full payment of the price. In implementing Its development scheme, it ignored the notification issued reserving a major portion of the land covered by the scheme as 'forest'. It is in this circumstance that the Administration is showing its inability to honour the commitment made by offering the plots, acceptance of price and giving delivery of possession. When a scheme of development of land and the allotments made thereunder are found to be in contravention of any law and contrary to general public interest, no claim based on so called vested right can be countenanced. Similar is the position with regard to 900 metres restriction imposed under the Aircrafts Act. No citizen can be allowed to claim any vested right which would result in violation of a statutory provision of law or Constitution. The claim, therefore, based on alleged vested right, has to be outright rejected.
20. The learned senior counsel then made some attempts to rely on the doctrines of 'promissory estoppel' and 'legitimate expectation'. Doctrine of 'legitimate expectation' has developed as a principle of reasonableness and fairness and is used against statutory bodies and government authorities on whose representations or promises, parties or citizens act and some detrimental consequences ensue because of refusal of authorities to fulfil their promises or honour their commitments. The argument under the label of 'estoppel' and 'legitimate expectation' are substantially the same. The Administration herein no doubt is guilty of gross mistake in including in its development scheme, a portion of land covered by the forest and land with restrictions under the Aircrafts Act. A vital mistake has been committed by the Chandigarh Administration in overlooking the notification reserving land under the Forest Act and the restrictions imposed under the Aircrafts Act, but overriding public interest outweighs the obligation of a promise or representation made on behalf of the Administration. Where public interest is likely to be harmed, neither the doctrine of "legitimate expectation' nor 'estoppel' can be allowed to be pressed into service by any citizen against the State Authorities. In Jit Ram Shiv Kumar and Ors. v. State of Haryana and Ors.MANU/SC/0335/1980 : [1980]3SCR689 , a two-Judge Bench of this Court by explaining and distinguishing Union of India v. Indo-Afgan Agencies Ltd.,MANU/SC/0021/1967 : [1968]2SCR366 and Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. (P) Ltd. v. State of U.P.MANU/SC/0336/1978 : [1979]118ITR326(SC) , observed thus :- .
'It is only in public interest that it is recognized that an authority acting on behalf of the government or by virtue of statutory powers cannot exceed his authority. Rule of ultra vires will become applicable when he exceeds his authority and the government would not be bound by such action. Any person who enters into an arrangement with the government has to ascertain and satisfy himself that the authority who purports to act for the government, acts within the scope of his authority and cannot urge that the government Is in the position of any other litigant liable to be charged with liability'.
21. In the aforesaid case of M/s Jit Ram Shiv Kumar (supra), the Municipal Committee of Bahadurgarh town to develop a Mandi promised that the traders who purchase plots in Mandi would be exempted from paying octroi duty on goods imported for trade to the Mandi. The State Government in exercise of powers under the Punjab Municipal Act directed the Municipal Committee to withdraw the exemption from payment of octroi duty. When the traders, who had set up their business in the Mandi on promise of getting exemption from octroi duty, challenged the action of the Municipality and the Punjab Government and raised on plea of 'estoppel' - it was rejected by this Court by relying on the decision of Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of M. Ramanatha Pillai v. The State of Kerala and Anr.MANU/SC/0048/1973 : (1973)IILLJ409SC and State of Kerala and Anr. v. The Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing (WVG.) Co. Ltd. Etc.MANU/SC/0068/1973 : [1974]1SCR671 . This Court in M/s Jit Ram Shiv Kumar (Supra), recorded the following conclusion which supports the view we propose to take in the circumstances of the present case :-
'On a consideration of the decisions of this Court, it is clear that there can be no "promissory estoppel' against the exercise of legislative power of the State. So also the doctrine cannot be invoked for preventing the government from acting in discharge of its duty under the law. The government would not be bound by the act of is officers and agents who act beyond the scope of their authority and a person dealing with the agent of the government must be held to have notice of the limitations of his authority. The court can enforce compliance by a public authority of the obligation laid on him if he arbitrarily or on his mere whim ignores the promises made by him on behalf of the government. It would be open to the authority to plead and prove that there were special considerations which necessitated his not being able to comply with his obligations in public interest'.
22. In public law in certain situations, relief to the parties aggrieved by. action or promises of public authorities can be granted on the doctrine of legitimate expectation' but when grant of such relief is likely to harm larger public interest, the doctrine cannot be allowed to be pressed into service. We may usefully call in aid Legal Maxim : 'Salus populi est suprema lex : regard for the public welfare is the highest law. This principle is based on the implied agreement of every member of society that his own individual welfare shall in cases of necessity yield to that of community. His property, liberty and life shall under certain circumstances be placed in jeopardy or even sacrificed for the public good'.,