MANU/SC/0415/2005
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (C) No. 72 of 1998 with civil Appeal No. 3735 of 2005 [Arising out of SLP (C) No. 21851/2003]
Decided On: 18.07.2005
Appellants:In Re: Noise Pollution - Implementation of the Laws for restricting use of loudspeakers and high volume producing sound systems

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
R.C. Lahoti, C.J. and Ashok Bhan, J.
Counsels:
Raju Ramachandran, Additional Solicitor General (NP), Jitendra Sharma (AC), N.N. Goswami, Rajiv Dutta, G.L. Sanghi, P.N. Mishra and R. Mohan, Sr. Advs., Sandeep Narain (AC), Anil Kumar Mittal, Anjali Jha, M.K.S. Menon, M.K. Michael, Indra Sawhney, Meenakshi Arora, P. Parmeswaran, Anil Katiyar, A. Francis Julian, A. Subhashini, D.S. Mahra, Ashok Bhan, Varuna Bhandari Gugnani, Vijay Panjwani, K.R. Sasiprabhu (NP), Jagjit Singh Chhabra (NP), Sanjay V.S. Chaudhary, Neeraj Kumar, V.K. Sidharthan, P.V. Yogeswaran, S. Ravi Shankar, Yamunah Nachiar and M.A. Chinnaswamy, Advs. for the appearing parties
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 2; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 133; Constitution Of India - Article 141, Constitution Of India - Article 142, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)A, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 25; Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 2; Factories Act, 1948 - Section 89, Factories Act, 1948 - Section 90; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 268; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 290; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 291; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 95
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 21
Cases Referred:
Free Legal Aid Cell Shri Sugan Chand Aggarwal alias Bhagatji v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi and Ors., MANU/DE/0654/2001; P.A. Jacob v. Superintendent of Police, Kottayam, MANU/KE/0001/1993; Om Birangana Religious Society v. State, MANU/WB/0105/1996; Kirori Mal Bishambar`` Dayal v. The State, MANU/PH/0003/1958; Bhuban Ram and Ors. v. Bibhuti Bhushan Biswas, MANU/WB/0337/1918; Ivour Heyden v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1984 Cri LJ 16 (NOC) ; Rabin Mukherjee v. State of West Bengal, MANU/WB/0058/1985; People United for better Living in Calcutta v. State of West Bengal, MANU/WB/0025/1993; Burrabazar Fireworks Dealers Association v. Commissioner of police, Calcutta, MANU/WB/0078/1997; Appa Rao, M.S. v. Govt. of T.N. , (1995) 1 LW 319 (Mad ; The Supreme Court in Church of God (Full Gospel) in India v. K.K.R. Majestic Colony Welfare Assn., MANU/SC/0537/2000; Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0285/1990; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India, MANU/SC/1081/2003; Moulana Mufti Syed Md. Noorur Rehman Barkati v. State of West Bengal, MANU/WB/0211/1998
Disposition:
Disposed of
Authorities Referred:
Chambers 20th Century Dictionary, Chambers 21st Century Dictionary
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  7

Dissented
  7

*Case Note:
Constitution of India - Act 21--Noise Pollution--Use of loudspeakers and public address systems in public places --Restrictions placed--Noise levels at boundaries of public places not to exceed 10 dB (A) above the ambient noise standards or 75 dB (A), whichever is lower--Use of such equipments totally barred from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000--Rule 5 (3)--Penal Code, 1860--Sections. 268, 290 and 291--Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981--Section 2 (a) --Environment (Protection) Act, 1986--Section 2 (c)-- Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, Section 133-- Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, Rule. 119 and 120--Tort Nuisance-Words and phrases - "noise", "noise pollution" --Definitions of.

Writ Petition 72/98 was filed by an engineer as a probono publico. He was provoked into filing the petition by a newspaper report that published a news of a 13 year old rape victim, whose cries for help went unheard due to the blaring noise of music over loudspeaker in the neighbourhood. The victim set herself ablaze and died the same evening. The main prayer was for a direction to the authorities to rigorously enforce the existing, laws on noise pollution in C.A. No. 3735 of 2005. The vires of the Central Government amendment to the Noise Pollution Control and Regulation Rules, 1999 were challenged as the State Governments were empowered to permit the use of loudspeakers during night hours (between 10 p.m. and 12 p.m.). The High Court of Kerala dismissed the petition. Feeling aggrieved the petition was filed by special leave.

Disposing the matter by giving very specific directions and laying down guidelines for the authority, the court;

Held:

Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees life and personal liberty to all persons. It is well-settled by repeated pronouncements of this Court as also the High Courts that right to life enshrined in Article 21 is not of mere survival or existence. It guarantees a right of persons to life with human dignity. Therein are included, all the aspects of life which go to make a person's life meaningful, complete and worth living. The human life has its charm and there is no reason why the life should not be enjoyed along with all permissible pleasures. Anyone who wishes to live in peace, comfort and quiet within his house has a right to prevent the noise as pollutant reaching him. No one can claim a right to create noise even in his own premises which would travel beyond his precincts and cause nuisance to neighbours or others. Any noise which has the effect of materially interfering with the ordinary comforts of life judged by the standard of a reasonable man is nuisance. Noise is more than just a nuisance. It constitutes a real and present danger to people's health. Day and night, at home, at work, and at play, noise can produce serious physical and psychological stress. No one is immune to this stress;. Though we seem to adjust to noise by ignoring it, the ear, in fact, never closes and the body still responds-sometimes with extreme tension, as to a strange sound in the night. It is a shadowy public enemy whose growing menace has increased in the modern age of industrialization and technological advancement. Noise has both auditory and non-auditory effects depending upon the intensity and the duration of the noise level. It affects sleep, hearing, communication, mental and physical health. It may even lead to the madness of people. Noise can disturb our work, rest, sleep, and communication. It can damage our hearing and evoke other psychological, and possibly pathological reactions. However, because of complexity, variability and the interaction of noise with other environmental factors, the adverse health effects of noise do not lend themselves to a straightforward analysis.

The noise level at the boundary of the public place, where loudspeaker or public address system or any other noise source is being used shall not exceed to 10 dB (A) above the ambient noise standards for the area or 75 dB (A) whichever is lower. No one shall beat a drum or tom-tom or blow a trumpet or beat or sound any instrument or use any sound amplifier at night (between 10.00 p.m. and 6 a.m.) except in public emergencies. The peripheral noise level of privately owned sound system shall not exceed by more than 5 dB(A) than the ambient air quality standard specified for the area in which it is used, at the boundary of the private place. No horn should be allowed to be used at night (between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.) in residential area except in exceptional circumstances.

Constitution of India--Articles 19 (1) (a), 21--Noise pollution --Aural aggression --Increase in volume of speech with assistance of artificial devices so as to compulsorily expose unwilling persons to hear noise raised to unpleasant or obnoxious levels, is violative of the rights to peaceful, comfortable and pollution free life--Right to speech implies right to silence, not to listen and not to be forced to listen.

Held:

Those who make noise often take shelter behind Article 19 (1)A pleading freedom of speech and right to expression. Undoubtedly, the freedom of speech and right to expression are fundamental rights but the rights are not absolute. Nobody can claim a fundamental right to create noise by amplifying the sound of his speech with the help of loudspeakers. While one has a right to speech, others have a right to listen or decline to listen. Nobody can be compelled to listen and nobody can claim that he has a right to make his voice trespass into the ears or mind of others. Nobody can indulge into aural aggression. If anyone increases his volume of speech and that too with the assistance of artificial devices so as to compulsorily expose unwilling persons to hear a noise raised to unpleasant or obnoxious levels then the person speaking is violating the right of others to a peaceful, comfortable and pollution-free life guaranteed by Article 21. Article 19 (1)A cannot be pressed into service for defeating the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 21. Free speech is not to be treated as a promise to everyone with opinions and beliefs, to gather at any place and at any time and express their views in any manner. The right is subordinate to peace and order. A person can decline to read a publication, or switch off a radio or a television set. But, he cannot prevent the sound from a loudspeaker reaching him. He could be forced to hear what, he wishes not, to hear. That will be an invasion of his right to be let alone, to hear what he wants to hear, or not to hear, what he does not wish to hear. One may put his mind or hearing to his own uses, but not that of another. No one has a right to trespass on the mind or ear of another and commit auricular or visual aggression. A loudspeaker is mechanical device, and it has no mind or thought process in it. Recognition of the right of speech or expression is recognition accorded to a human faculty. A right belongs to human personality, and not to a mechanical device. One may put his faculties to reasonable uses. But, he cannot put his machines to any use he likes. He cannot use his machines to injure others.

Constitution of India--Articles 21, 25--Noise Pollution--Ban on use of noise-- Emitting fireworks between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., even during religions occasions--Held, does not violate religions rights--Secular nature of Indian polity examined and discussed.

Held:

Indian society is pluralistic. People of this great country belong to different castes and communities, have belief in different religions and customs and celebrate different festivals. We are tolerant for each other. There is unity in diversity. If relaxation is allowed to one there will be no justification for not permitting relaxation to others and if we do so the relaxation will become the rule. It will be difficult to enforce the restriction. It is a judicially noticeable fact that in advanced countries there is a move for collective celebration of festivals. For example, in United States, on May Day, a show of fireworks is arranged outside the city. People assemble in large numbers to witness such show which is officially arranged by the State. Such example can be emulated in our country. People belonging to that section of the society which wishes to celebrate a festival or an occasion may be encouraged to organize such event collectively and may have a show of fireworks away from the residential locality. Such a move would save the people form the hazardous effects of noise pollution caused by fireworks and at the same time bring the people together and contribute in developing closeness, unity and brotherhood. In our opinion the total restriction on bursting firecrackers between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. must continue without any relaxation in favour of anyone. The Court by restricting the time of bursting the firecrackers has not in any way violated the religious rights of any person as enshrined under Article 25 of the Constitution. The festival of Diwali is mainly associated with Pooja performed on the auspicious day and not with firecrackers. In no religious text book it is written that Diwali has to be celebrated by bursting crackers. Diwali is considered as a festival of lights not of noises. Shelter in the name of religion cannot be sought for, for bursting firecrackers and that too at odd hours. Another argument that has been put forward to remove the restriction during festivals is that they are celebrated by most of the people and that an inconvenience to a few should not become the reason for restraining a greater lot. If at all the people feel it necessary to burst firecrackers they can choose and go for such firecrackers which on being burst emit colours or lights mainly and produce very little or no sound. Their use can be permitted. The Department of Explosives can, while working out formulae for firecrackers, also along side classify the crackers into two categories that could be: (i) sound emitting crackers, and (b) colours/light emitting crackers.

Constitution of India--Article 21--Noise Pollution--Restrictions on manufacture of fireworks--Can be relaxed in case of fireworks meant for export--Explosives Rules, 1983--Environmental Protection, 1986 and Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000.

Held:

Firecrackers for the purpose of export may be manufactured and bear higher noise levels subject to the following conditions: (i) The manufacturer should be permitted to do so only when he has an export order with him and not otherwise; (ii) The noise levels for these firecrackers should conform to the noise standards prescribed in the country to which they are intended to be exported as per the export order; (iii) These firecrackers should have a different colour packing, from those intended to be sold in India; (iv) The firecrackers should have a clear print on then stating that they are not to be sold in India. In Case these firecrackers are found being sold in Indian territory, then the manufacturer and the dealer selling these goods should be held liable. The Department of Explosives may divide the firecrackers into two categories--(i) Sound emitting firecrackers, and (ii) Colour/light emitting firecrackers. There shall be a complete ban on bursting sound emitting firecrackers between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. It is not necessary to impose restrictions as to time on bursting of colour/light emitting firecrackers. Every manufacturer shall on the box of each firecracker mention details of its chemical contents and that it satisfies the requirement as laid down by DOE. In case of a failure on the part of the manufacturer to mention the details or in cases where the contents of the box do not match the chemical formulae as stated on the box, the manufacturer may be held liable.
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER - NOISE POLLUTION : INDUSTRY, VEHICULAR
Referred Notifications:
MANU/ENVT/0003/1999
JUDGMENT
R.C. Lahoti, C.J.
1. These two matters before us raise certain issues of far- reaching implications in day-to-day life of the people in India relatable to noise pollution vis-a-vis right to life enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India as interpreted in its wide sweep by the constitutional courts of the country. Though a limited grievance was raised to begin with but several interveners and interlocutory applications enhanced the scope of hearing and the cases were heard in a very wide perspective centering around Article 21 of the Constitution. Several associated and incidental issues have also been gone into.
Facts in W.P.(C) No. 72/98
2. CWP No. 72/98 is filed by Shri Anil K. Mittal, an engineer by profession moving the Court pro bono publico. The immediate provocation for filing the petition was that a 13 year old girl was a victim of rape (as reported in newspapers of January 3, 1998). Her cries for help sunk and went unheard due to blaring noise of music over loudspeaker in the neighbourhood. The victim girl, later in the evening, set herself ablaze and died of 100% burn injuries. The petition complains of noise created by the use of the loudspeakers being used in religious performances or singing bhajans and the like in busy commercial localities on the days of weekly offs. Best quality hi-fi audio systems are used. Open space, meant for use by the schools in the locality, is let out for use in marriage functions and parties wherein merry making goes on with hi-fi amplifiers and loudspeakers without any regard to timings. Modern residents of the locality organize terrace parties for socializing and use high capacity stereo systems in abundance. These are a few instances of noise pollution generated much to the chagrin of students taking examinations who find it utterly difficult to concentrate on studies before and during examinations. The noise polluters have no regard for the inconvenience and discomfort of the people in the vicinity. Noise pollution has had its victims in the past and continues to have victims today as well. The petitioner seeks to invoke the writ jurisdiction of this Court so that there may not be victims of noise pollution in future. The principal prayer is that the existing laws for restricting the use of loudspeakers and other high volume noise producing audio-video systems, be directed to be rigorously enforced.
Facts in C.A. No. 3735 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No. 21851/03)
3. Leave granted.
4. The Government of India framed and published Noise Pollution Control and Regulation Rules, 1999. On 11.10.2002 the Government of India brought in an amendment in the Rules. The amendment empowered the State Government to permit the use of loudspeaker or public address system during night hours (between 10 pm and 12 pm) on or during the cultural or religious occasions for a limited period not exceeding 15 days. Vires of this amendment were put in issue by the appellant submitting that the provision is not accompanied by any guidelines and is capable of being misused to such an extent that the whole purpose behind enacting the Rules itself may be defeated. The High Court of Kerala found the petition devoid of any merit and directed the petition to be dismissed. Feeling aggrieved, this petition has been filed by special leave.
5. The civil Appeal and, in particular, the writ petition raise issues of wide ranging dimensions relating to noise pollution and the implications thereof. Taking cognizance of the matters as public interest litigation, the Court vide its order dated 6.4.98, directed the cause title of the petition filed by Shri Anil Kumar Mittal to be amended as "In re. Noise Pollution-Implementation of the Laws for Restricting Voice of Loudspeakers and High Volume Producing Sound Systems". The Court also appointed Shri Jitender Sharma, Senior Advocate and Shri Pankaj Kalra, Advocate to appear as Amicus Curiae. Both the learned counsel were present in the Court and accepted the assignment. Unfortunately, Shri Pankaj Kalra, Advocate expired during the pendency of the proceedings. Shri Sandeep Narain, Advocate has appeared in his place and assisted the Court.
6. The Union of India and the Central Pollution Control Board have not opposed the prayer made in the writ petition and the appeal and have rather supported the writ petitioner. Valuable inputs have been provided by the Central Pollution Control Board in the form of pleadings, authentic publications, research documents and other papers. The Union of India, while not opposing the relief sought for by the petitioner, has pointed out several practical difficulties in completely regulating and where necessary, eliminating noise pollution.
7. Though, as we have already noted, the sweep of hearing in these matters has been very wide, the principal thrust of the writ petitioner and the learned Amicus has been directed towards noise created by firecrackers, loudspeakers used - by political parties, at religious places and on religious and social occasions or festivals. Hindu Bokta Jana Sabai, Tamil Nadu Fireworks and Amorces Manufacturers Association, Universal Society Performance, All India Federation of Fireworks Association, Indian Fireworks Manufacturers Association and some individuals have sought for interventions. It is not necessary to notice the contents of the intervention applications in detail. Suffice it to say that the reliefs sought for in the applications are conflicting. Some of the interveners have sought for:-
(i) noise created by horns of engines, pressure horns in automobiles, loudspeakers, denting painting of cars, particularly, in residential areas and from unauthorized premises being prohibited;
(ii) use of loudspeakers in religious places such as temples, mosque, churches, gurudwaras and other places being discontinued or at least regulated;
(iii) firecrackers burst during Diwali festival and on other occasions for fun or merry making being prohibited completely, if the noise created exceeds certain decibels and being so regulated as to prevent bursting during night hours.
Other set of interveners seeks such like reliefs:-
(i) granting exemption in favour of bursting of firecrackers on or during festivals without regard to the limit of time as such bursting of firecrackers is associated with the performance of ceremonies relating to religion or social occasions;
(ii) laying down mechanism for regulating the very manufacturing of firecrackers so that such firecrackers as unreasonably enhance noise pollution may be kept away from entering the markets and playing into the hands of the people.
8. It is obvious that during the course of the hearing the scope got enlarged and the Court has been addressed on very many issues from very many angles.
9. Article 21 of the Constitution guarantees life and personal liberty to all persons. It is well settled by repeated pronouncements of this Court as also the High Courts that right to life enshrined in Article 21 is not of mere survival or existence. It guarantees a right of person to life with human dignity. Therein are included, all the aspects of life which go to make a person's life meaningful, complete and worth living. The human life has its charm and there is no reason why the life should not be enjoyed along with all permissible pleasures. Anyone who wishes to live in peace, comfort and quiet within his house has a right to prevent the noise as pollutant reaching him. No one can claim a right to create noise even in his own premises which would travel beyond his precincts and cause nuisance to neighbours or others. Any noise which has the effect of materially interfering with the ordinary comforts of life judged by the standard of a reasonable man is nuisance. How and when a nuisance created by noise becomes actionable has to be answered by reference to its degree and the surrounding circumstances including the place and the time.
10. Those who make noise often take shelter behind Article 19(1)A pleading freedom of speech and right to expression. Undoubtedly, the freedom of speech and right to expression are fundamental rights but the rights are not absolute. Nobody can claim a fundamental right to create noise by amplifying the sound of his speech with the help of loudspeakers. While one has a right to speech, others have a right to listen or decline to listen. Nobody can be compelled to listen and nobody can claim that he has a right to make his voice trespass into the ears or mind of others. Nobody can indulge into aural aggression. If anyone increases his volume of speech and that too with the assistance of artificial devices so as to compulsorily expose unwilling persons to hear a noise raised to unpleasant or obnoxious levels then the person speaking is violating the right of others to a peaceful, comfortable and pollution-free life guaranteed by Article 21. Article 19 cannot be pressed into service for defeating the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 21. We need not further dwell on this aspect. Two decisions in this regard delivered by High Courts have been brought to our notice wherein the right to live in an atmosphere free from noise pollution has been upheld as the one guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution. These decisions are Free Legal Aid Cell Shri Sugan Chand Aggarwal alias Bhagatji v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi and Ors. MANU/DE/0654/2001 : , AIR2001Delhi455 (D.B.) and P.A. Jacob v. Superintendent of Police, Kottayam MANU/KE/0001/1993 : , AIR1993Ker1. We have carefully gone through the reasoning adopted in the two decisions and the principle of law laid down therein, in particular, the exposition of Article 21 of the Constitution. We find ourselves in entire agreement therewith.