MANU/SC/0640/2003
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 7533, 7534 and 7535 of 1997 and W.P. (C) No. 35/2003
Decided On: 27.08.2003
Appellants:Indian Handicrafts Emporium and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
V.N. Khare, C.J., Y.K. Sabharwal and S.B. Sinha, JJ.
Counsels:
G.L. Sanghi, P.P. Malhotra and Tapas Ray, Sr. Advs., Pramod Saigal, Vipin Sanghi, Rachna Jain, Sidharth Khattar, E.C. Agrawala, Sanjay Parikh, Avinash K. Misra, A.N. Singh, P. Sridhar, M. Srinivas, R. Rao, Sudhir Mishra, Sridhar Potaraju, Pankaj Singh, Rajiv Nanda, C.V. Subba Rao, Prateek Jalan, Ajay Sharma, P. Parmeswaran, Anil Katiyar, Bela Maheshwari, J.S. Attri, Raj Panjwani, Vijay Panjwani, Iqbal Shamsi, B.B. Singh, Javed Mahmud Rao, Satish Vig, Sakesh Kumar, S.K. Agnihotri, K.R. Nagaraja, Manish Singhvi, Ashok Kumar Mahajan, Sanjay R. Hegde, Anil Kumar Mishra, Satya Mitra, Ranjit Thomas, Bharati Upadhyaya, V.N. Raghupathy, Gopal Singh, Amit Kr. Poddar, Krishna Sharma, Asha Gopalan Nair and V.K. Sidharthan, Advs. for appearing parties
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 13(1), Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1), Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(f), Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(g), Constitution Of India - Article 252, Constitution Of India - Article 300A, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Gujarat Prohibition Act, 1949 - Section 12, Gujarat Prohibition Act, 1949 - Section 13(b); Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Section 118, Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Section 304, Indian Succession Act, 1925 - Section 92; Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 10, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 10(3)(a), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 13, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 14, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 15, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 16, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 17, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 17H, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2(2), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 2(21), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 22, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 29, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 38J, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 39, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 39(1)(c), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 39(a)(i), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 40, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 40(2A), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 40A, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 41, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 42, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 44, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 45, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 46, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 47, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 48, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 49, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 49(7), Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 49A, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 49B, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 49C, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 50, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 51, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 55, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 59, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 63, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 64, Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972 - Section 9
Relevant Section:
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 - Section 49C
Cases Referred:
Motor General Traders and Anr. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors., MANU/SC/0293/1983; Rattan Arya and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr., MANU/SC/0550/1986; Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Ors., MANU/SC/0595/1989; Hamdard Dawakhana (Wakf) Lal Kuan, Delhi and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/0016/1959; Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0011/1970; Narender Kumar and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/0013/1959; State Maharashtra v. Mumbai Upnagar Gramodyog Sang ; Balsara case MANU/SC/0009/1951; K.K. Narula v. State of J&K, MANU/SC/0034/1967; Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport, Authority of India and Ors., MANU/SC/0048/1979; Har Shankar and Ors. v. Dy. Excise and Taxation Commissioner, MANU/SC/0321/1975; Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad and Ors. v. Jan Mohammed Usmanbhai and Anr., MANU/SC/0099/1986; Jyoti Prasad v. Union Territory of Delhi, MANU/SC/0079/1961; Kapila Hingorani v. State of Bihar, MANU/SC/0403/2003; John Vallamattom and Anr. v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0480/2003; United States v. Darby, (1941) 312 US 100 ; D. Saibaba & Bar Council of India and Anr., MANU/SC/0388/2003; Welfare Assocn. A.R.P. Maharashtra and Anr. v. Ranjit P. Gohil and Ors., MANU/SC/0129/2003; Unni Krishnan J.P. and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors., MANU/SC/0333/1993; State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala, MANU/SC/0019/1957; Sakharkherda Education Society v. State of Maharashtra, MANU/MH/0122/1968; Andhra Kesari Education Society v. Govt. of A.P., MANU/AP/0165/1983; Bapuji Educational Assn. v. State, MANU/KA/0239/1984; T.M.A. Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka, MANU/SC/0905/2002; Sodan Singh v. New Delhi Municipal Committee, MANU/SC/0521/1989; Islamic Academy of Education and Anr. v. State of Karnataka and Ors., MANU/SC/0580/2003; Krishna Kumar Narula v. The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors., MANU/SC/0034/1967; Fatehchand's case, MANU/SC/0041/1977; Mansell's case, (1956) C.L.R. 550; Hughes case (1954) 93 C.L.R. 1; Chief Justice of A.P. v. L.V.A. Dikshitulu, MANU/SC/0416/1978; Kehar Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.), MANU/SC/0241/1988; District Mining Officer v. Tata Iron & Steel Co. MANU/SC/0412/2001; State of A.P. v. Mc. Dowell Company, MANU/SC/0427/1996; Council of civil Services Union v. Minister for the civil Services, 1985 AC 374; R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department Ex-parte Bring, 1991 AC 696; High Court of Gujarat and Anr. v. Gujarat Kishan Mazdoor Panchayat and Ors., MANU/SC/0214/2003; Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless Co. MANU/SC/0073/1987; DPP v. Schildkamp, (1971) AC 1; Jones v. Wrotham Park Settled Estates, (1980) AC 74; Kammins Ballrooms Co. Ltd. v. Zenith Investments (Torquay) Ltd., 1971 AC 850 Bangalore Water Supply v. A. Rajappa MANU/SC/0257/1978; Magor & St. Mellons R.D.C. v. Newport Corporation, 1951 (2) All ER 839; Hameedia Hardware Stores v. B. Mohan Lal Sowcar, MANU/SC/0180/1988; Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation Ltd., Chandigarh v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh and Ors., MANU/SC/0479/1990; S. Gopal Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh, MANU/SC/0550/1996; State of Maharashtra v. Indian Medical Association and Ors., (2002) 1 SCC 580; Davies v. Minister of Land, Agriculture and Water Development, [1997] 1 LRC 123; Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0285/1990
Authorities Referred:
Principles of Statutory Interpretation of Justice G.P. Singh, 5th Edition; The Interpretation and Application of Statutes by Reed Dickersen; Dr. D.D. Basu in his Commentary on the Constitution of India (Sixth Edition) Volume L
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.03.1997 of the Delhi High Court in C.W.P. No. 1272 of 1992 (MANU/DE/0611/1997)
Disposition:
Petition Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  26

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  22

Case Note:
(1)Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 - Section 49C (as inserted by Act No. 44 of 1991)--Constitution of India--Articles 14 and 19 (1) (g)--Section 49C as inserted by 1991 Amending Act imposing total prohibition in trade of imported ivory--Whether offending Articles 19 (1) (g) and 14?--Held, "no"--Amendments brought for purpose of saving endangered species from extinction.

The stand of the State that by reason of sale of ivory by the dealers, poaching and killing of elephants would be encouraged, cannot be said to be irrational. In the year 1972 when the Wild Life (Protection) Act was enacted, there might not have been any necessity to preserve the elephant as also ivory. The species might not have been on the brink of extinction. The objects and reasons set out for bringing in amendments in the said Act in the years 1986, 1991 and 2003 clearly bring into fore the necessity to take more and more stringent measures so as to put check on poaching and illegal trade in ivory. Experience shows that poaching may be difficult to be completely checked. Preventive measures as regard poaching leading to killing of elephants for the purpose of extraction of their tusks is a difficult task to achieve and, thus, the Parliament must have thought it expedient to put a complete ban in trade in ivory to meet the requirement of the country.

The primal object for which dealing in ivory imported from Africa had been prohibited was to see that while holding the stock, the people may not deal in Indian ivory which may be procured from illegal killings of Indian Elephant. The Amending Act indirectly seeks to protect Indian Elephant and to arrest their further depletion.

India being a sovereign country is not obligated to make law only in terms of CITES ; it may impose stricter restrictions having regard to local needs.

When a trade is prohibited as has sought to be done by reason of the 1991 Amendment Act by inserting Chapter VA, the matters incidental thereto or connected therewith must be dealt with accordingly. For all intent and purport, the statute would treat the traders on a different footing than non-traders. They form a different and distinct class.

The appellants used to trade in ivory stands admitted. They, thus, would come within the purview of the definition of the trader also is undisputable. The manner in which despite legal ban on trade, a person may not take recourse to illegal trading is a matter which squarely falls within the purview of the legislative competence. It is now well-settled that the Parliament cannot only enact a law for avoidance or evasion of commission of an illegal trade but also may make law to see that the law is not evaded by taking recourse to machination or camouflage. The loopholes, if any, in such matters can and should be plugged.

It is now idle to contend having regard to the provisions contained in Section 40 (2A) of the Act that the traders have been discriminated with vis-a-vis the non-traders. Traders are class by themselves and as such no question of any discrimination arises. The classification is well-defined and well-perceptible. Traders and non-traders constitute two different classes and the classification is founded on an intelligible differentia clearly distinguishing one from the other. The Amending Acts are constitutional, legal and valid.

(2) Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972--Sections 2 (2), 40A and 49C--Trader having imported ivory legally into India prior to 1991 amendment--Not entitled to carry on any business or trade therein--But unless he commits offence, same would not vest in Government--However, he would not be entitled to keep possession thereof except as provided for in Section 49C--Section 40A not applicable to traders.

The provisions of Chapter V which includes Section 40A of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 is not applicable to the appellant traders. Chapter VA is a complete Code in itself and it would be a fallacy to read into or extend by implication the mitigating provision of Section 40A into Chapter VA. The Legislature, had it so desired, could have incorporated a similar provision in Chapter VA.

Sub-section (3) of Section 49C of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, provides that where, in a declaration made under sub-section (1), the person making the declaration expresses his desire to retain with himself and of the items of the stocks specified in the declaration for his bona fide personal use, the Chief Wild Life Warden, with the prior approval of the Director, may, if he is satisfied that the person is in lawful possession of such items, issue certificate of ownership in favour of such person with respect to all, or as the case may be, such of the items as in the opinion of the Chief Wild Life

Warden, are required for the bona fide personal use of such person and affix upon such items identification marks in such manner, as may be prescribed. Sub-section (6) of section 49C further provides that where a person who has been issued a certifi­cate of ownership under sub-section (3) in respect of any item, it is permis­sible for him to transfer any such item to any such person, whether by way of gift, sale or otherwise, or transfer or transport from the State in which he resides to another State any such item and he shall within thirty days from such transfer or transport, report the transfer or transport to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer or transport is effected.

The upshot of the aforesaid provisions is that any trader who has imported ivory legally into India prior to coming into force of the Act No. 44 of 1991, although would not be entitled to carry on any business or trade in respect thereof, but having regard to the provisions referred to hereinbefore, unless he commits an offence in relation thereto, the same would not vest in the Government. He would, however, not be entitled to keep possession thereof except in the mode and manner provided for in Section 49C of the Act.

The Legislature has deliberately used the word 'bona fide personal use' in Section 49C and has placed the onus on the traders to prove the same so as to be entitled to retain the articles out of the stocks declared by it. This requirement is due to the fact that the acquisition of an animal article by an individual non-trader at the time of purchase would be presumed to be one for his own personal bona fide use while on the other hand in the case of the traders the acquisition of animal articles as reflected in the stocks of a trader would be solely for the purpose of sale. Hence, the imposition of the requirement of personal bona fide use in the case of traders cannot be said to be discriminatory or arbitrary or irrational or perverse entitling the appellants to continue to have control thereover.

(3) Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972--Sections 39 (a) (i) and 49(7)--Appellants possessing ivory--In absence of criminal trial and offence having been found committed, Section 39 (a) (i) has no application--And properties do not stand vested in Government in terms thereof--But imported ivory must be handed over to competent authority--However, no question of compensating appellants.

A trader in terms of a statute is prohibited from carrying on trade. He also cannot remain in control over the animal article. The logical consequence wherefor would be that he must be deprived of the possession thereof. The possession of the animal article including imported ivory must, therefore, be handed over to the competent authority. In a case of this nature where a statute has been enacted in public interest, restriction in the matter of possession of the property must be held to be implicit. If Section 49 (7) is not so construed, it cannot be given effect to.

Therefore, the appellants have no right to possess the articles in question. Keeping in view of the fact that the provisions of the statute have been held to be intra vires, the question of compensating the appellants would not arise as vesting of possession thereof in the State must be inferred by necessary implication.

It is true that right to property is a human right as also a constitutional right. But it is not a fundamental right. Each and every claim to property would not be property right.[Para 93]

Control of property by the State short of deprivation would not entail payment of compensation.
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS:
1. Applicability of the provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 is in question in this set of appeals which arise out of a common judgment and order dated 20.3.1997 passed by a Division Bench of the Delhi High Court. The appellants herein are engaged in the business of manufacture and sale of articles relating to art and craft manufactured from ivory. The appellants herein imported ivory from African countries. They have manufactured certain articles out of the same. It is not dispute that the said import had legally been made as there did not exist any restriction in that regard.
2. The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as 'the said Act' for the sake of brevity) was enacted to provide for the protection of wild animals, birds and plants and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto or incidental therewith. Indian elephant was brought within the purview of Schedule A of the Act on or about 5. 10.1977. The Union of India also banned export of ivory in the said year.
3. Chapter V of the said Act deals with trade or commerce in wild animals, animal articles and trophies. By Act No. 28 of 1986 Chapter V-A was inserted therein whereby and restrictions were imposed on trade or commerce in wild animals, cattle and trophies. By Act No. 44 of 1991, Section 49C was inserted in Chapter V-A whereby and where-under a total prohibition in trade of imported ivory was imposed. The said Act was brought into force by the Government of India by issuing a Notification dated 27.9.1991 with effect from 2.10.1991. Six months' time had been granted to make the said Act operational, that is to say, until 2.4.1992. Within the aforementioned period, the trader, thus, could dispose of his stock.
4. The appellants herein filed writ petitions before the Delhi High Court, inter alia, questioning the constitutionality and validity of the 1991 Amendment Act prohibiting trade in the imported ivory on several grounds. The High Court by an interim order dated 26.3.1992 stayed the operation of the Act. The said interim order was, however, vacated on 22.5.1992. The appellants herein did not take any step to dispose of the imported ivory held in stock by them even during the said period.
5. By reason of the impugned judgment the High Court upheld the vires of the said Act. Against the said judgment the appellants are in appeal before us.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANTS
6. Mr. G.L. Sanghi, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants, would urge that the impugned provisions of the Act are violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India inasmuch as thereby the right of the appellant to trade in ivory has unjustly been prohibited. The learned counsel would submit that restrictions imposed by reason of the said Act being excessive, the same must be held to be confiscatory in nature. The Amending Act is also ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India, being irrational and arbitrary. The learned counsel has drawn our attention to the fact that the population of elephants has gone up in several countries, e.g., Botswana, South Africa. Namibia and Zimbabwe, and these countries have been permitted by Convention on International Trade in Endangered species of Wild Fauna and Flora (for short 'CITES') to deal in ivory subject of course to certain restrictions. Our attention has further been drawn to the fact that ivory which was placed in Appendix-I of the CITES has now been placed in Appendix-II thereof. It was also submitted that ivory collected from dead animals should also be permitted to be dealt in.
7. It was urged that even assuming the Amending Act of 1991 was a valid piece of legislation, in the year 1991 having regard to the subsequent event viz. increase in the population of Elephant worldwide the same may be held to be ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Strong reliance in this behalf has been placed on Motor General Traders and Anr. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0293/1983 : [1984]1SCR594 , Rattan Arya and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. MANU/SC/0550/1986 : [1986]2SCR596 and Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Ors. . The learned counsel would submit that in any event the Amending Act being vague in nature, the same should be held ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Reliance in this connection has been placed on Hamdard Dawakhana (Wakf) Lal Kuan, Delhi and Anr. v. Union of India and ors. MANU/SC/0016/1959 : 1960CriLJ671 .
8. Mr. Sanghi, would further submit that the ivory which has legally been imported by the appellants herein prior to coming into force of the 1991 Amendment Act, having not vested in the Government, the appellants should be held to be at liberty to deal therewith. According to the learned counsel ivory having lawfully been imported and the appellants having, thus, been in lawful possession thereof, there could be no reason as to why they should be deprived of the possession therefrom, particularly having regard to the provisions of Sub-section (3) of Section 49C thereof. It was urged that once such a declaration is filed in terms of Sub-section (1) of Section 49C, the Chief Wild Life Warden should be held to be statutorily obligated to give to the appellants a certificate of ownership in respect of the entire stock-in-trade, entitling them to transfer the same to any person whether by way of gift, sale or otherwise, as is provided under Sub-section (6) thereof. The learned counsel would argue that there does not exist any provision in the said Act for payment of compensation and as the property vests in the Government only on certain conditions, the appellants herein cannot be dispossessed therefrom without any authority of law and in that view of the matter, the impugned provisions must be held to the ultra vires Article 300A of the Constitution. Sub-section (7) of Section 49C, Mr. Sanghi would submit, must be construed so as to uphold the right of property of the appellants in the property as otherwise the same would be rendered unconstitutional.
9. According to the learned counsel, the Parliament amended the Act by way of Act 16 of 2003, in terms of whereof Section 40A was inserted enabling the holders of stock of ivory to file a fresh declaration. The learned counsel would contend that having regard to the fact that the appellants are prohibited from carrying on any trade or business in ivory, for all intent and purport, they should be held to be covered by the aforementioned provisions. In any event, the learned counsel would contend that the guidelines issued by the respondent must be held to be ultra vires Section 63 of the Act as also the rules framed thereunder, and, thus, the Central Government cannot be said to have any jurisdiction to direct that out of the seized articles, only one item shall be released and the rest would be destroyed. Such a power conferred upon the statutory authority being wholly arbitrary as thereby unbridled power has been conferred, the same must also be held ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution. Mr. Sanghi would urge that the statute cannot be construed only with reference to its objective sought to be achieved without considering the constitutionality thereof. Strong reliance in this behalf has been placed on Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India MANU/SC/0011/1970 : [1970]3SCR530 .
10. The learned counsel would further submit that the High Court wrongly applied the principle of 'res extra commercium' in the instant case which is per se inapplicable.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENTS:
11. Mr. Malhotra and Mr. Panjwani, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand, would submit that having regard the purpose and object, the said Act seeks to achieve, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the Parliament has the requisite legislative competence. By reason of the provisions of the Amending Act 28 of 1986, trade in various articles had been prohibited, Imported ivory was, however, brought within the purview of Act 44 of 1991. The learned counsel would contend that a bare perusal of the provisions of the 1986 and 1991 Amending Acts would clearly go to show that the intention of the Parliament was that those who carry on trade or business in the imported African ivory should dispose of the same within a period of six months i.e. before coming into force thereof whereafter their possession would become illegal, subject, however, to the grant of certificate of ownership by the Chief Wild Life Warden in terms of Sub-section (3) of Section 49C of the said Act. It was submitted that a trader cannot claim the entire imported ivory or the articles manufactured therefrom to be necessary for his bona fide personal use and in that view of the matter the Chief Wild Life Warden has been conferred with a discretionary jurisdiction in relation thereto and only such articles in respect whereof the certificate of ownership is issued, can be subject matter of the transfer in terms of Sub-section (6) of Section 49C of the Act. Any article in respect whereof no certificate of ownership has been granted, would fall within the mischief of Sub-section (7) of Section 49C. Such a provision, it was urged, must be held to be reasonable as a trader was given sufficient time to dispose of all the articles in his possession.
12. Drawing our attention to the provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, Mr. Malhotra would submit that the trade and possession of ivory having been totally prohibited. Even non-traders are not entitled to possess the same in terms of Section 40(2A) of the Act. The learned counsel would further submit that it would not be correct to contend that legislative policy has changed in India inasmuch from the minutes of meeting of CITES, it would appear that India and Kenya differed with the proposal of five African countries that they be permitted to trade in ivory for any purpose whatsoever. Our attention was further drawn to the fact that ivory still is in Appendix-I so far as India is concerned.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
13. The said Act was enacted to provide for the protection of wild animals, birds and plants and for matters connected therewith or ancillary thereto or incidental therewith. Section 2 thereof contains the interpretative provisions. Some of the relevant provisions are:
2. Definitions.-- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
[(1) "animal" includes mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, other chordates and invertebrates and also includes their young and eggs;]
(2) "animal article" means an article made from any captive animal or wild animal, other than vermin, and includes an article or object in which the whole or any part of such animal [has been used, and ivory imported into India and an article made therefrom];
(11) "dealer" in relation to any captive animal, animal article, trophy, uncured trophy, meat or specified plant, means a person, who carries on the business of buying or selling any such animal or article, and includes a person who undertakes business in any single transaction;
(14) "Government property" means any property referred to in Section 39; [or Section 17H;]
(36) "wild animal" means any animal specified in Schedules I to IV and found wild in nature;"
14. Chapter V of the Act deals with trade or commerce in wild animals, animal articles and trophies.
15. Section 39(1)(c) occurring in Chapter V of the said Act provides that every ivory imported into India and an article made from such ivory in respect of which any offence against this Act or any rule or order made there-under has been committed, shall be the property of the State Government.
16. Section 40 provides for declaration. Sub-section (1) whereof is in the following terms:
40. Declaration.--(1) Every person having at the commencement of this Act the control, custody or possession of any captive animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II, [or animal article, trophy or uncured trophy] derived from such animal or salted or dried skins of such animal or the musk of a musk deer or the horn of a rhinoceros, shall, within thirty days from the commencement of this Act, declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer the number and description of the animal, or article of the foregoing description under his control custody or possession and the place where such animal or article is kept."
17. Sub-section (2) of Section 40 prohibits acquisition, receiving, keeping in his control, custody or possession, sell, offer for sale or otherwise transfer or transport any animals specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II and allied things by any person whatsoever. Sub-sections (2A) and (2B) which have been inserted by Act 16 of 2003 read thus:
"(2A) No person other than a person having a certificate of ownership, shall, after the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002 acquire, receive, keep in his control, custody or possession any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II, except by way of inheritance.
(2B) Every person inheriting any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy under Sub-section (2A) shall, within ninety days of such inheritance make a declaration to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer and the provisions of Sections 41 and 42 shall apply as if the declaration had been made under Sub-section (1) of Section 40:
Provided that nothing in Sub-sections (2A) and (2B) shall apply to the live elephant.]
(3) Nothing in Sub-section (1) or Sub-section (2) shall apply to a recognised zoo subject to the provisions of Section 381 or to a public museum.
(4) The State Government may, by notification, require any person to declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer [any animal or animal article] or trophy (other than a musk of a musk deer or horn of a rhinoceros) or salted or dried skins derived from an animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II in his control, custody or possession in such form, in such manner, and within such time, as may be prescribed."
18. Section 40A provides for immunity in certain cases which is in the following terms:
"40A. Immunity in certain cases.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (2) and (4) of Section 40 of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification, require any person to declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer, any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy derived from animals specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II in his control, custody or possession, in respect of which no declaration had been made under Sub-section (1) or Sub-section (4) of Section 40, in such form, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
(2) Any action taken or purported to be taken for violation of Section 40 of this Act at any time before the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002 shall not be proceeded with all pending proceedings shall stand abated.
(3) Any captive animal, animal article, trophy or uncured trophy declared under Sub-section (1) shall be dealt with in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed."
19. Section 41 deals with inquiry and preparation of inventories which is in the following terms:
41. Inquiry and preparation of inventories.--(1) On receipt of a declaration made under Section 40, the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may, after such notice, in such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed,--
(a) enter upon the premises of a person referred to in Section 40;
(b) make inquiries and prepare inventories of animal articles, trophies, uncured trophies, salted and dried skins and captive animals specified in Schedule I and Part II of Schedule II and found thereon; and
(c) affix upon the animals, animal article, trophies or uncured trophies identification marks such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) No person shall obliterate or counterfeit any identification mark referred to in this Chapter.
20. Chapter V-A was brought into the statute book by Act No. 28 of 1986. "Scheduled animal" has been defined in Clause (a) of Section 49A in the following terms:
"(a) 'scheduled animal' means as animal specified for the time being in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II;"
21. Clause (c) of Section 49A defines 'specified date' which in relation to ivory imported into India or an article made therefrom would mean the date of expiry of six months from the commencement of Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 1991. The said provision was inserted by Act No. 44 of 1991.
22. Section 49B provides that subject to the other provisions of the said Section, on and after the specified date, no person shall commence or carry on the business as a manufacturer of, or dealer in, scheduled animal article, or a dealer in ivory imported into India or articles made therefrom or a manufacturer of such articles.
23. Section 49C of the said Act reads as under:
"49-C. Declaration by dealers. - (1) Every person carrying on the business or occupation referred to in Sub-section (1) of Section 49B shall, within thirty days from the specified date, declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer,-
(a) his stocks, if any, as at the end of the specified date of-
(i) scheduled animal articles;
(ii) scheduled animals and parts thereof;
(iii) trophies and uncured trophies derived from scheduled animals;
(iv) captive animals, being scheduled animals;
(v) ivory imported into India or articles made therefrom;
(b) the place or places at which the stocks mentioned in the declaration are kept; and
(c) the description of such items, if any, of the stocks mentioned in the declaration which he desires to retain with himself for his bona fide personal use.
(2) On receipt of a declaration under Sub-section (1), the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer may take all or any of the measures specified in Section 41 and for this purpose, the provisions of Section 41 shall, so far as may be, apply.
(3) Where, in a declaration made under Sub-section (1), the person making the declaration expresses his desire to retain with himself any of the items of the stocks specified in the declaration for his bona fide personal use, the Chief Wild Life Warden, with the prior approval of the Director, may, if he is satisfied that the person is in lawful possession of such items, issue certificates of ownership in favour of such person with respect to all, or as the case may be, such of the items as in the opinion of the Chief Wild Life Warden, are required for the bona fide personal use of such person and affix upon such items identification marks in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such items shall be kept in any commercial premises.
(4) No person shall obliterate or counterfeit any identification mark referred to in Sub-section (3).
(5) An appeal shall lie against any refusal to grant certificate of ownership under Sub-section (3) and the provisions of Sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of Section 46 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to appeals under this sub-section.
(6) Where a person who has been issued a certificate of ownership under Sub-section (3) in respect of any item,-
(a) transfer such items to any person, whether by way of gift, sale or otherwise, or
(b) transfers or transports from the State in which he resides to another State any such item,
he shall, within thirty days of such transfer or transport, report the transfer or transport to the Chief Wild Life Warden or the authorised officer within whose jurisdiction the transfer or transport is effected.
(7) No person, other than a person who has been issued a certificate of ownership under Sub-section (3) shall, on and after the specified date, keep under his control, sell or offer for sale or transfer to any person any scheduled animal, on a scheduled animal article or ivory imported into India or any article made therefrom."
24. Section 50 deals with power of entry, search, arrest and detention.
25. Section 51 deals with penalties. The relevant portion of Section 51 is as follows:
51. Penalties.--(1) Any person who [contravenes any provision of this Act [(except Chapter VA and Section 38J)]] or any rule or order made thereunder or who commits a breach of any of the conditions of the any licence or permit granted under this Act, shall be guilty of an offence against this Act, and shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to [three years] or with fine which may extend to [twenty-five thousand rupees] or with both:
Provided that where the offence committed is in relation to any animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or meat of any such animal or animal article, trophy or uncured trophy derived from such animal or where the offence relates to hunting in a sanctuary or a National Park or altering the boundaries of a sanctuary or a National Park, such offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees:
Provided further that in the case of a second or subsequent offence of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term of the imprisonment shall not be less than three years but may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees.
(1A) Any person who contravenes, any provisions of Chapter VA, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than [three years] but which may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than [ten thousand rupees].]
(1B) Any person who contravenes the provisions of Section 38J shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent offence the term of imprisonment may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
26. Section 63 empowers the Central Government to makes rules.
INTERPRETATION OF THE ACT:
27. The provisions of the said Act must be construed having regard to the purport and object it seeks to achieve. Not only inter alia wild animal is to be protected but all other steps which are necessary therefore so as to ensure ecological and environmental security of the country must be enforced. The interpretation provisions as regard 'wild animal' employs the word 'includes' and, thus, must be assigned a broad meaning. The Amending Acts must be viewed in that perspective. Prosecution and conservation of wild animal is essential for very existence of human life. A trade in wild animal which is sought to be prohibited with an object to oversee survival of human beings must be given its full effect. The CITES was formulated keeping in view the aforementioned policy. India is a member State of the Convention. It is a signatory to the other treaties and conventions in this behalf. Appendix I of CITES which came into effect from 18th January, 1990 provided for complete prohibition of internal and trans border trade in ivory. The Parliament enacted the Amendment Act (Act No. 44 of 1991) with a view to save the species of Indian Elephant and to give effect to the said international treaties. Prior thereto, that is 1989, the African Elephant was proposed to be brought in Appendix I of CITES.
28. In the Press Release of October, 2002, the following appears:
"Another high-profile item is the African elephant. After an eight-year ban on ivory sales, in 1997 CITES agreed to allow three African countries - Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe - to make one time sales from their existing legal stocks of raw ivory. The ivory - which weighed 49,574 kg. and represented 5,446 tusks - was sold to Japan in 1999 and earned some USD5 million. The funds were used for elephant conservation activities in the three range states.
In the year 2002, the three countries plus South Africa and Zambia are proposing one-off sales of existing ivory stocks to be followed later by annual quotas. The proposals are for a first sale of 20,000 kg. and an annual quota of 4,000 kg. for Botswana, 10,000 Kg. and 2,000 kg. respectively for Namibia, 30,000 kg. and 2,000 kg. for South Africa and 10,000 kg. and 5,000 kg. for Zimbabwe. Zambia is proposing a one-off sale of 17,000 kg. A proposal from India and Kenya, on the other hand, argues that further ivory sales from African elephants should be clearly prohibited as a precautionary measure for reducing future threats to the elephant.
Meanwhile, Japan is seeking to open up trade in most northern hemisphere populations of mike whale and a Pacific population of Bryde's whale. Its proposals stress the use of national legislation and DNA identification of individual whales to monitor catches and trade. Similar proposals were presented without success at the most recent CITES conferences in 1997 and 2000. This year's debate is likely to involve issues related to science, sustainable use, possible enforcement problems, and the international Whaling Commission's moratorium on commercial whaling."
29. Further, in the Press Release of 12th November, 2002, the following appears:
"CITES has conditionally accepted proposals from Botswana, Namibia and South Africa that they be allowed to made one - off sales of 20, 10 and 30 tonnes, respectively, of ivory. The ivory is held in existing legal stocks that have been collected from elephants that dies of natural causes or as a result of government - regulated problem - annual control.
Similar proposals from Zambia and Zimbabwe for 17 and 10 tonnes, respectively, were not accepted. Today's decisions by CITES must still be formally adopted by the full Plenary on Friday, when the current two - week conference ends."
30. The rival contention as regard the interpretation and application of the said Act must be considered having regard to the aforementioned principles as also the international treaties and development which took place subsequently.
WHETHER THE AMENDING ACT 44 OF 1991 IS ULTRA VIRES ARTICLES 19(1)(g) AND 14 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
31. Appellant No. 1 herein appeared to have imported ivory from 1971 to 1988. It was in possession of 755.930 Kgs. Of solid Ivory Articles and 10. 050 Kgs. with metal.
32. Dealing in imported ivory so long the law permits may be a fundamental right but if the statute prohibits it, it must be held to be a law within the meaning of Clause (6) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India in terms whereof reasonable restriction is imposed. A trade which is dangerous to ecology may be regulated or totally prohibited. For the aforementioned purpose, regulation would include prohibition.
33. What would be a reasonable restriction which can be imposed in public interest is a matter which is no longer res integra.
34. In Narender Kumar and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0013/1959 : [1960]2SCR375 , this Court while interpreting the word 'restrictions' held as follows:
"It is reasonable to think that the makers of the Constitution considered the word "restriction" to be sufficiently wide to save laws "inconsistent" with Article 19(1), or "taking away the rights" conferred by the Article, provided this inconsistency or taking away was reasonable in the interests of the different matters mentioned in the clause. There can be no doubt therefore that they intended the word "restriction" to include cases of "prohibition" also. The contention that a law prohibiting the exercise of a fundamental right is in no case saved, cannot therefore be accepted."