MANU/SC/0013/2021
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 5785, 7615, 7975, 8454, 8480, 8482, 8785-94, 9139, 9216, 9638 of 2019 and 3064 of 2020
Decided On: 11.01.2021
Appellants: Ireo Grace Realtech Pvt. Ltd.
Vs.
Respondent: Abhishek Khanna and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, Indu Malhotra and Indira Banerjee, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Piyush Singh, Aditya Parolia, Nithin Chandran, Akshay Srivastava, Rajesh Kumar, Mohit Kumar Bansal, Advs., Gaurav Goel and E.C. Agrawala, AORs
For Respondents/Defendant: Yashraj Singh Deora, AOR, Sonal Mashankar, Shivangi Sud, Shyam Agarwal, Deepak Kumar Khushalani, Advs., Santosh Kumar Pandey, AOR, A.R. Takkar, Amarjeet Kumar, Shriya Takkar, Advs., A. Venayagam Balan, Gopal Jha, Rajiv Raheja, Sumit R. Sharma and Sanjay Kumar Visen, AORs
Subject: Consumer
Subject: Property
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Prior History:
Arising out of impugned final Judgment and Order dated 28.03.2019 in CC No. 3873/2017 passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi MANU/CF/1202/2019
Relevant Section:
Real Estate (Regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 12; CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986 [REPEALED] - Section 2(1)(r); Real Estate (Regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 14; Real Estate (Regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 79; CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986 [REPEALED] - Section 3; Real Estate (Regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 18; Real Estate (Regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 19; Real Estate (Regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 71; Real Estate (Regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 88
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Arbitration And Conciliation Act, 1996 - Section 8; Companies Act, 1956; Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 2(1), Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3, Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 9, Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 12(4), Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 14, Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 23; Consumer Protection Bill, 1986; Forest Act, 1927; Forest Conservation Act, 1980; Haryana Fire Service Act, 2009 - Section 15, Haryana Fire Service Act, 2009 - Section 15(2), Haryana Fire Service Act, 2009 - Section 15(3); Haryana Real Estate (Regulation & Development) Rules, 2017 - Rule 28; Insolvency And Bankruptcy Code, 2016 - Section 62; Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 - Section 143, Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 - Section 165, Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 - Section 166, Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 - Section 167, Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 - Section 175; Punjab Factory Rules, 1952; Punjab Land Preservation Act, 1900; Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 11(a), Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 12, Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 14, Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 18, Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 19, Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 31, Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 71, Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 71(1), Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 79, Real Estate (regulation And Development) Act, 2016 - Section 88; Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013; Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993; Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956; Securitisation And Reconstruction Of Financial Assets And Enforcement Of Security Interest Act, 2002 - Section 37; Seeds Act, 1966 - Section 19, Seeds Act, 1966 - Section 21; Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972; Workmens Compensation Act, 1923; Factories Act, 1948; Disaster Management Act, 2005; Consumer Protection Act, 2019
Cases Referred:
Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Ltd. v. Govindan Raghavan and Ors. MANU/SC/0463/2019; Lucknow Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta MANU/SC/0178/1994; Regional Director, Employees' State Insurance Corporation v. High Land Coffee Works of P.F.X. Saldanha and Sons and Ors. MANU/SC/0607/1991; Commissioner of Income Tax, Andhra Pradesh v. Taj Mahal Hotel, Secunderabad MANU/SC/0239/1971; The State of Bombay and Ors. v. The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha and Ors. MANU/SC/0200/1960; Fortune Infrastructure and Ors. v. Trevor D'Lima and Ors. MANU/SC/0253/2018; The Secretary, Thirumurugan Co-operative Agricultural Credit Society v. M. Lalitha (Dead) through Lrs. and Ors. MANU/SC/1025/2003; National Seeds Corporation Ltd. v. M. Madhusudhan Reddy and Ors. MANU/SC/0038/2012; Virender Jain v. Alaknanda Cooperative Group Housing Society Limited and Ors. MANU/SC/0482/2013; Emaar MGF Land Limited v. Aftab Singh MANU/SC/1458/2018; Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation v. GAR Re-Rolling Mills and Ors. MANU/SC/0454/1994; Gujarat State Financial Corporation v. Natson Manufacturing Co. Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0007/1978; P.R. Deshpande v. Maruti Balaram Haibatti MANU/SC/0491/1998; National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Mastan and Ors. MANU/SC/2367/2005; Transcore v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/5319/2006; Mathew Varghese v. M. Amritha Kumar and Ors. MANU/SC/0114/2014; IREO Grace Realtech Pvt. Ltd. v. Ritu Hasija CC No. 190 of 2017; Subodh Pawar v. IREO Grace Realtech Pvt. Ltd. and Ors.; IREO v. Surendra Arora Civil Appeal (Diary) No. 48101 of 2018; IREO Grace Realtech Pvt. Ltd. v. Surendra Arora; IREO Victory Valley Pvt. Ltd. v. Shamshul Hoda Khan Civil Appeal No. 4801 of 2019; Dilworth v. Commissioner of Stamps 1899 AC 99 : 15 TLR 61; Geetu Gidwani Verma v. Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Ltd.; Wg. Cdr. Arifur Rahman Khan and Ors. v. DLF Southern Homes Pvt. Ltd.; R. v. Evans (1854) 3 E & B 363 : 118 ER 1178; Imperia Structures Ltd. v. Anil Patni and Anr. MANU/SC/0811/2020 : (2020) 10 SCC 783
Authorities Referred:
Black's Law Dictionary, Fifth Edition
Case Category:
MATTERS RELATING TO CONSUMER PROTECTION - APPEALS UNDER SECTION 23 OF THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986
Referred Notifications:
MANU/ENVT/0034/2006
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  12

Mentioned
  14

Case Note:
Consumer - Delivery of possession - Inordinate delay - Department of Town and Country Planning granted license to Respondents for developing group housing colony on vast tract of land - Developer opened booking for apartments - Respondent No. 1-buyer was allotted apartment in Tower-C of project - Similar allotment letters were issued to various other Apartment Buyers in housing project - Respondent No. 1 filed Consumer Complaint before National Commission, wherein it was prayed that Developer be directed to refund amount paid by Apartment Buyer on account of inordinate delay in completing construction and obtaining Occupation Certificate - Commission held that since Developer had failed to deliver possession of allotted flats to Apartment Buyers, it amounted to deficiency in service, and complainants were entitled to refund of amount alongwith appropriate compensation - Hence, present appeal - Whether Respondent-buyers entitled for refund of amounts on account of inordinate delay in completing construction and obtaining Occupation Certificate.

Facts:

The Department of Town and Country Planning granted a license to Respondent No. 3 and Respondent No. 4 for developing a group housing colony on a vast tract of land where multiple towers comprising of 1356 apartments were to be constructed. Subsequently, the license for construction was transferred to the Appellant-Developer. The Developer opened booking for the apartments. The Respondent No. 1- Apartment Buyer was allotted a apartment in Tower-C of the project. Similar allotment letters were issued to various other Apartment Buyers in the housing project. Respondent No. 3 obtained environmental clearance for setting up the group housing project from the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority. Respondent No. 1 filed a Consumer Complaint being Consumer Case before the National Commission, wherein it was inter alia prayed that the Developer be directed to refund the amount paid by the Apartment Buyer alongwith interest. The Commission held that since the Developer had failed to deliver possession of the allotted flats to the Apartment Buyers, it amounted to deficiency in service, and the complainants were entitled to refund of the amount alongwith appropriate compensation.

Held, while disposing off the appeal:

(i) The chronology for obtaining Fire NOC would indicate a delay of approximately six months in obtaining the Fire NOC by the Developer. [18.11]

(ii) The incorporation of such one-sided and unreasonable clauses in the Apartment Buyer's Agreement constitutes an unfair trade practice under Section 2(1)(r) of the Consumer Protection Act. Even under the 1986 Act, the powers of the consumer fora were in no manner constrained to declare a contractual term as unfair or one-sided as an incident of the power to discontinue unfair or restrictive trade practices. An unfair contract had been defined under the 2019 Act, and powers have been conferred on the State Consumer Fora and the National Commission to declare contractual terms which are unfair, as null and void. This was a statutory recognition of a power which was implicit under the 1986 Act. Thus, the Developer could not compel the apartment buyers to be bound by the one-sided contractual terms contained in the Apartment Buyer's Agreement. [19.7]

(iii) Allottees at Serial Nos. 1 and 2 in Chart A were obligated to take possession of the apartments, since the construction was completed, and possession offered, after the issuance of Occupation Certificate. The Developer was however obligated to pay Delay Compensation for the period of delay which had occurred till the date of offer of possession was made to the allottees. The Developer made an alternate offer of allotment of apartments in Phase 1 of the project. The allottees were however not bound to accept the same because of the inordinate delay in completing the construction of the Towers where units were allotted to them. The Occupation Certificate was not available even as on date, which clearly amounts to deficiency of service. The allottees could not be made to wait indefinitely for possession of the apartments allotted to them, nor can they be bound to take the apartments in Phase 1 of the project. The allottees have submitted that they have taken loans, and are paying high rates of interest to the Banks. Consequently, it was held that the allottees in Chart B were entitled to refund of the entire amount deposited by them. [21.2]

Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
Indu Malhotra, J.
1. The present batch of Appeals has been filed by the Appellant-Developer, to challenge the judgment passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission ("National Commission") directing refund of the amounts deposited by the Apartment Buyers in the project "The Corridors" developed in Sector 67-A, Gurgaon, Haryana, on account of the inordinate delay in completing the construction and obtaining the Occupation Certificate. Aggrieved by the said Judgment, the Appellant-Developer has filed the present batch of Appeals Under Section 23 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 ("Consumer Protection Act").
Since common issues have arisen for consideration, they are being decided by a common Judgment.
For the sake of brevity, the facts in Civil Appeal No. 5785 of 2019 are being referred to as the lead matter.
2. The Department of Town and Country Planning granted a license to Respondent No. 3 - Precision Realtors Pvt. Ltd. and Respondent No. 4 - Blue Planet Infra Developers and Madeira Conbuild Pvt. Ltd. for developing a group housing colony on a vast tract of land admeasuring about 37.5125 acres where multiple towers comprising of 1356 apartments were to be constructed. Subsequently, the license for construction was transferred to the Appellant-Developer.
3. On 23.07.2013, the Building Plans of the project were sanctioned by the Directorate of Town and Country Planning, Haryana. Clause 3 of the sanctioned Plan stipulated that NOC/Clearance from the Fire Authority shall be submitted within 90 days from the date of issuance of the sanctioned Building Plans.
4. The Developer opened booking for the apartments in 2013. On 07.08.2013, the Respondent No. 1- Apartment Buyer was allotted a 2 BHK apartment in Tower-C of the project. Similar allotment letters were issued to various other Apartment Buyers in the housing project.
5. On 23/24.10.2013, the Developer applied for issuance of an NOC for the Fire Fighting Scheme of the group housing colony to the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Gurgaon.
The Commissioner, Municipal Corporation vide letter dated 30.12.2013 raised 16 objections with respect to the proposed Fire Fighting Scheme submitted by the Developer.
The Developer replied to the said objections vide letter dated 22.01.2014, stating that the objections raised by the Commissioner had been rectified. The Developer sought approval of the Fire Fighting Scheme on priority.
The Municipal Corporation vide letter dated 28.03.2014 informed the Developer that the deficiencies in the application for Fire NOC had not been cured. The Developer was granted 15 days' time to cure the defects, failing which, the application would be deemed to be rejected.
Ultimately, on 27.11.2014, the Director, Haryana Fire Service granted approval to the Fire Fighting Scheme subject to the conditions mentioned therein.
6. On 12.12.2013, Respondent No. 3 obtained environmental clearance for setting up the group housing project from the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority. Clause 39 of the said clearance stipulated that the project proponent shall submit a copy of the Fire Safety Plan duly approved by the Fire Department before the start of construction.
Under Part-B of the General Conditions in Clause (vi), it was stipulated that the project proponent would obtain all other statutory clearances, such as the approval for storage of diesel from the Chief Controller of Explosives, Fire Department, Civil Aviation Department, Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, Forest Act, 1927, PLPA 1900 etc. from the concerned authorities, prior to the construction of the project.
7. The Apartment Buyers vide letter dated 25.03.2014 received a copy of the Apartment Buyer's Agreement with a construction linked payment plan, which is extracted hereunder:
8. On 12.05.2014, the Developer executed the Apartment Buyer's Agreement in favour of Respondent No. 1 - Apartment Buyer for a total consideration of Rs. 1,45,22,006/-.
The relevant terms of the Apartment Buyer's Agreement are set-out hereinbelow:
Clause 6 pertains to payment of Earnest Money, and reads as:
6. EARNEST MONEY
The Company and the Allottee hereby agree that 20% (Twenty percent) of the Sale Consideration of the Apartment shall be deemed to constitute the "Earnest Money".
(emphasis supplied)
Clause 7 pertains to payment of instalments, and provides that:
7. PAYMENT OF INSTALLMENTS
7.1 The Allottee has opted for the Payment Plan annexed herewith as Annexure-IV. The Allottee understands that it shall always remain responsible for making timely payments in accordance with the Payment Plan Annexure-IV. Only in the case of a construction linked Payment Plan, the Company shall be obliged to send demand notices for installments on or about the completion of the respective stages of construction. The demand notices shall be sent by registered post/courier and shall be deemed to have been received by the Allottee within 05 (five) days of dispatch by the Company or receipt thereof, whichever is earlier.
7.2 It shall not be obligatory on the part of the Company to send any reminders for any payments whatsoever. Although the Company shall not be obliged to send demand notices other than for the construction linked Payment Plan, or any reminders whatsoever for payments of the instalment, in the event that any such notices or reminders are sent by the Company to the Allottee, as a gesture of courtesy, these shall not, under any circumstances, be construed or deemed to be a waiver of the obligations and responsibility of the Allottee to itself make timely payments in accordance with the Payment Plan or in response to such demand notices in the case of a construction linked Payment Plan.
7.3 If the Allottee prepays any installments(s) or part thereof to the Company before it falls due for payment, the Allottee shall be entitled to pre-payment rebate on such prepaid amounts at the interest rate declared by the Company for this purpose from time to time. The interest on such prepaid installment(s) shall be calculated from the date of prepayment uptill the date when such amount would actually have become due. The credit due to the Allottee on account of such pre-payment rebate shall however be adjusted/paid only at the time of final instalment for the said Apartment.
7.4 The Allottee shall be liable to pay simple interest on every delayed payment, at the rate of 20% per annum from the date that it is due for payment till the date of actual payment thereof. In case the Allottee defaults in making payment of the due installment (including partial default) beyond a period of 90 days from the due date, the Company shall be entitled, though not obliged, to cancel the Allotment and terminate this Agreement at any time thereafter in accordance herewith. However, the Company may alternatively, in its sole discretion, instead decide to enforce the payment of all its dues from the Allottee by seeking Specific Performance of this Agreement. Further, in every such case of delayed payment, irrespective of the type of Payment Plan, the subsequent credit of such delayed installments(s)/payments along with delayed interest in the account of the Company shall not however constitute waiver of the right of termination reserved herein and shall always be without prejudice to the rights of the Company to terminate this Agreement in the manner provided herein.
7.5 Save and except in the case of any bank, financial institution or company with whom a tripartite agreement has been separately executed for financing the said Apartment, or where the Company has given its permission to mortgage to any bank, financial institution or company for extending a loan to the Allottee against the said Apartment, the Company shall not be responsible towards any other third party, who has made payments or remittances to the Company on behalf of the Allottee and any such third party shall not have any right against the said Apartment or under this Agreement whatsoever. The Company shall issue the payment receipts only in favour of the Allottee. Notwithstanding the above, the Allottee is and shall remain solely and absolutely responsible for ensuring and making all the payments due under this Agreement on time.
7.6 The Allottee may obtain finance/loan from any financial institution, bank or any other source, but the Allottee's obligation to purchase the said Apartment pursuant to this Agreement shall not be contingent on the Allottee's ability or competency to obtain such finance. The Allottee would remain bound under this Agreement whether or not it has been able to obtain finance for the purchase of the said Apartment. The Allottee agrees and has fully understood that the Company shall not be under any obligation whatsoever to make any arrangement for the finance/loan facilities to the Allottee from any bank/financial institution. The Allottee shall not omit, ignore, delay, withhold, or fail to make timely payments due to the Company in accordance with the Payment Plan opted by the Allottee in terms of this Agreement on the grounds of the non-availability of bank loan or finance from any bank/financial institution for any reason whatsoever and if the Allottee fails to make the due payment to the Company within the time agreed herein, then the Company shall have right to terminate this Agreement in accordance herewith.
7.7 Furthermore, in every case where the Allottee has obtained a loan/finance from a bank, financial institution or any other source and for which a tripartite agreement has also been executed by the Company, it is agreed by the Allottee that any default by the Allottee of the terms and conditions of such loan/finance, shall also be deemed to constitute a default by the Allottee of this Agreement, whereupon or at the written request of such bank, financial institution or person from whom such loan has been obtained the Company shall be entitled to terminate this Agreement.
(emphasis supplied)
Clause 13 of the Agreement provides for handing over possession of the Apartments and reads as:
13. POSSESSION AND HOLDING CHARGES
13.1. Upon receipt of the Occupation Certificate under the Act pertaining to the said Apartment, the Company shall notify the Allottee in writing to come and take over the possession of the said Apartment ("Notice of Possession"). In the event the Allottee fails to accept and take the possession of the said Apartment within the time indicated in the said Notice of Possession, the Allottee shall be deemed to have become the custodian of the said Apartment from the date indicated in the Notice of Possession and the said Apartment shall thenceforth remain at the sole risk and cost of the Allottee itself.
13.2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Agreement, the Allottee agrees that if it fails, ignores or neglects to take the possession of the said Apartment in accordance with the Notice of Possession sent by the Company, the Allottee shall be liable to pay additional charges equivalent to Rs. 7.5 (Rupees Seven & Half only) per sq. ft. on the Super Area per month of the said Apartment ("Holding Charges'"). The Holding Charges shall be a distinct charge in addition to the maintenance charges and not related to any other charges/consideration as provided in this Agreement.
13.3 Subject to Force Majeure, as defined herein and further subject to the Allottee having complied with all its obligations under the terms and conditions of this Agreement and not having defaulted under any provision(s) of this Agreement including but not limited to the timely payment of all dues and charges including the total Sale Consideration, registration charges, stamp duty and other charges and also subject to the Allottee having complied with all formalities or documentation as prescribed by the Company, the Company proposes to offer the possession of the said Apartment to the Allottee within a period of 42 (Forty Two) months from the date of approval of the Building Plans and/or fulfilment of the preconditions imposed thereunder ("Commitment Period"). The Allottee further agrees and understands that the Company shall additionally be entitled to a period of 180 days ("Grace Period"), after the expiry of the said Commitment Period to allow for unforeseen delays beyond the reasonable control of the Company.
13.4. Subject to Clause 13.3, if the Company fails to offer possession of the said Apartment to the Allottee by the end of the Grace Period, it shall be liable to pay to the Allottee compensation calculated at the rate of Rs. 7.5 (Rupees Seven & Half only) per sq. ft. of the Super Area ("Delay Compensation'") for every month of delay until the actual date fixed by the Company for offering possession of the said Apartment to the Allottee. The Allottee shall be entitled to payment/adjustment against such 'Delay Compensation' only at the time of 'Notice of Possession' or at the time of payment of the final installment, whichever is earlier.
13.5. Subject to Clause 13.3, in the event of delay by the Company in offering the possession of the said Apartment beyond a period of 12 months from the end of the Grace Period (such 12 month period hereinafter referred to as the "Extended Delay Period'"), then the Allottee shall become entitled to opt for termination of the Allotment/Agreement and refund of the actual paid up installment(s) paid by it against the said Apartment after adjusting the interest on delayed payments along with Delay Compensation for 12 months. Such refund shall be made by the Company within 90 days of receipt of intimation to this effect from the Allottee, without any interest thereon. For the removal of doubt, it is clarified that the Delay Compensation payable to the Allottee who is validly opting for termination, shall be limited to and calculated for the fixed period of 12 months only irrespective of the date on which the Allottee actually exercised the option for termination. This option may be exercised by the Allottee only up till dispatch of the Notice of Possession by the Company to the Allottee whereupon the said option shall be deemed to have irrevocably lapsed. No other claim, whatsoever, monetary or otherwise shall lie against the Company and/or the Confirming Parties nor be raised otherwise or in any other manner by the Allottee.
13.6. If, however, the completion of the said Apartment is delayed due to Force Majeure as defined herein, the Commitment Period and/or the Grace Period and/or the Extended Delay Period, as the case may be, shall stand extended automatically to the extent of the delay caused under the Force Majeure circumstances. The Allottee shall not be entitled to any compensation whatsoever, including Delay Compensation for the period of such delay.
13.7. Under no circumstances shall the possession of the said Apartment be given to the Allottee and the Allottee shall not be entitled to the possession of the said Apartment unless and until the full payment of the Sale Consideration and any other dues payable under the Agreement have been remitted to the Company and all other obligations imposed under this Agreement have been fulfilled by the Allottee to the complete satisfaction of the Company.
13.8. The Allottee hereby agrees and affirms that upon taking possession of the said Apartment, the Allottee shall be deemed to have waived all claims against the Company/Confirming Parties, if any, in respect of the area, specifications, quality, construction and/or any item, amenity or provision in the said Apartment or The Corridors Project.
(emphasis supplied)
Clause 21.3 reads as under:
21. TIME IS OF ESSENCE; TERMINATION AND FORFEITURE OF EARNEST MONEY
21.1 Notwithstanding anything contained in this Agreement, timely performance by the Allottee of all its obligations under this Agreement or exercise of any options wherever and wherever and whenever indicated herein this Agreement including without limitation its obligations to make timely payments of the Sale Consideration, maintenance charges and other deposits and amounts, including any interest, in accordance with this Agreement shall be of essence under this Agreement. If the Allottee neglects, omits, ignores, or fails in the timely performance of its obligations agreed or stipulated herein for any reason whatsoever or acts in any manner contrary to any undertaking assured herein or fails to exercise the options offered by the Company within the stipulated period or to pay in time to the Company any of the instalments or other amounts and charges due and payable by the Allottee as described in Clause 7.7 herein, the Company shall be entitled to cancel the allotment and terminate this Agreement in the manner described hereunder.
21.1.1 In case any failure or breach committed by the Allottee is incapable or rectification or is in the opinion of the Company unlikely to be rectified by the Allottee or where the Allottee is a repetitive defaulter or such failure or default is continuing despite the Allottee being given an opportunity to rectify the same, then this Agreement may be cancelled by the Company with immediate effect at its sole option by written notice ("Notice of Termination") to the Allottee intimating to the Allottee the decision of the Company to terminate the Agreement and the grounds on which such action has been taken.
.....
21.3 The Allottee understands, agrees and consents that upon such termination, the Company shall be under no obligation save and except to refund the amounts already paid by the Allottee to the Company, without any interest, and after forfeiting and deducting the Earnest Money, interest on delayed payments, brokerage/commission/charges, service tax and other amounts due and payable to it, only after resale of the said Apartment. Upon termination of this Agreement by the Company, save for the right to refund, if any to the extent agreed hereinabove, the Allottee shall have no further right or claim against the Company and/or the Confirming Parties which, if any, shall be deemed to have been waived off by the Allottee and the Allottee hereby expressly consents thereto. The Company shall thenceforth be free to deal with the said Apartment in any manner whatsoever, in its sole and absolute discretion and in the event that the Allottee has taken possession of the said Apartment and everything whatsoever contained therein and in such event, the Allottee and/or any other person/occupant of the said Apartment shall immediately vacate the said Apartment and otherwise be liable to immediate ejectment as an unlawful occupant/trespasser. This is without prejudice to any other rights available to the Company against the Allottee.
(emphasis supplied)
9. On 27.12.2017, Respondent No. 1 filed a Consumer Complaint being Consumer Case No. 3823 of 2017 before the National Commission, wherein it was inter alia prayed that the Developer be directed to refund the amount of Rs. 1,44,72,364/- paid by the Apartment Buyer alongwith interest @ 20% per annum compounded quarterly till realization, and compensation towards damages on account of harassment, mental agony and litigation charges.
The Apartment Buyer inter alia submitted that the Developer had invited applications from the public for booking flats in the housing complex "The Corridors", by misrepresenting that all necessary approvals/pre-clearances with respect to the and constructions had already been obtained from the office of the Director, Town and Country Planning, Haryana, and other civil authorities. The Developer had misrepresented at the time of booking that the project would have a 90-meters motorable access road approaching the project from Junction 63A to 67A which was shown in the Apartment Buyer's Agreement in the layout plan. However, there was no access road of 90-meters to the project, and/or 24-meters in the revised plans. The Apartment Buyers were induced to book apartments on false representations made by the Developer that construction of the project would be completed the project within 42 months from the collection of the initial booking amount.
As per Clause 13.3 of the Agreement, possession was to be handed over within a period of 42 months from the date of approval of the Building Plans, with a Grace Period of 180 days. Despite the aforesaid terms, the Developer had not offered possession to the Apartment Buyers till the date of filing the complaint, even though the "Commitment Period" for handing over possession had expired on 22.01.2017, and also the Grace Period had lapsed on 22.07.2017. The Apartment Buyers had regularly paid instalments as per the demands raised by the Developer. As on December 2016, a total sum of Rs. 1,44,72,364/- had been paid by the Respondent No. 1 to the Developer. To date, no offer of possession has been made to Apartment Buyers.
The Apartment Buyers submitted that the Building Plans were revised in 2017, when the entire layout was changed which led to the scrapping of some of the residential towers, so that the same could be converted to commercial towers in the project. It was further mentioned that the office of the District Town Planner (Enforcement), Gurgaon, Haryana, vide a restraint order dated 20.02.2017 issued Memo No. 525-526 to the Developer to immediately stop the construction with respect to Tower-A and Tower-B for causing harassment to the buyers.
10. The Developer filed its reply to the Consumer Complaint submitting that there was no delay in offering possession of the flats, since as per Clause 13.3 of the Agreement, possession was to be handed over to the allottees within 42 months from the date of approval of the Building Plans, which included fulfilment of the conditions imposed thereunder. The Building Plan approval had been granted on 23.07.2013, which stipulated compliance with several pre-conditions, including obtaining Fire Safety Scheme approval. This approval was granted only on 27.11.2014. Consequently, the 48 months' time period for delivery of possession of the apartment would commence only on 27.11.2014, and expire on 27.11.2018. Consequently, there was no delay in offering possession of the apartments. Hence, the complaint was premature and liable to be dismissed.
11. The National Commission in another case titled as "IREO Grace Realtech Pvt. Ltd. v. Ritu Hasija" being CC No. 190 of 2017 and connected matters, decided on 18.09.2018, held that Clause 44 of that Agreement was wholly unfair and one-sided, which gave only a limited right to the Apartment Buyers to terminate the agreement, and seek refund of the amount paid by them. Clause 21.3 of the Flat Buyers Agreement read in conjunction with the other Clauses of the Agreement would result in a situation where a flat buyer, despite the failure of the builder to offer possession within the time stipulated, would be practically left remediless for 1½ years from the date of default, with no interest or compensation payable to him, even though the money was utilized by the builder. Even the principal amount would be refunded at an uncertain future point, after the builder had sold the apartment allotted to the complainant. Such a term was wholly unfair and unjust since the Developer had the right to terminate the agreement even if a single default occurred on the part of the Buyers, and forfeit the earnest money, and deduct other charges specified in Clause 21.3 of the Buyers Agreement. Clause 44 postponed the right of the flat buyer to terminate the agreement and seek compensation even after the Grace Period had expired, which was wholly unfair and one-sided. The contract could be terminated after a delay of 12 months, and would be entitled to only delay compensation, without interest.
The Commission held that since the Developer had failed to deliver possession of the allotted flats to the Apartment Buyers, it amounted to deficiency in service, and the complainants were entitled to refund of the amount alongwith appropriate compensation.
The Developer has filed SLP (C) No. 40286 of 2019 against this judgment, which has been tagged to the present batch of appeals.
12. This judgment was followed by the National Commission in the case of Subodh Pawar v. IREO Grace Realtech Pvt. Ltd. and Ors., decided on 24.09.2018. The SLP filed by the Developer against this judgment, was dismissed by the Supreme Court vide order dated 28.01.2019, on the statement made by the Counsel for the Developer that the amount due and payable as per the order of the National Commission, shall be refunded within a period of four weeks with interest @ 10% p.a. w.e.f. 27.05.2018 till the date of payment.
A similar order was passed by this Court in IREO v. Surendra Arora Civil Appeal (Diary) No. 48101 of 2018 on 28.01.2019.
13. With respect to the same project, an Apartment Buyer filed a complaint Under Section 31 of the Real Estate (Regulation & Development) Act, 2016 ("RERA Act") read with Rule 28 of the Haryana Real Estate (Regulation & Development) Rules, 2017 before the Haryana Real Estate Regulatory Authority, Gurugram ("RERA"). In this case, the Authority vide order dated 12.03.2019 held that since the environment clearance for the project contained a pre-condition for obtaining Fire Safety Plan duly approved by the Fire Department before starting construction, the due date for possession would be required to be computed from the date of Fire Approval granted on 27.11.2014, which would come to 27.11.2018. Since the Developer had failed to fulfil the obligation Under Section 11(a) of this Act, the Developer was liable under the proviso to Section 18 to pay interest at the prescribed rate of 10.75% p.a. on the amount deposited by the complainant, upto the date when the possession was offered. However, keeping in view the status of the project, and the interest of other allottees, the Authority was of the view that refund cannot be allowed at this stage. The Developer was directed to handover possession of the apartment by 30.06.2020, as per the Registration Certificate for the project.
14. The present batch of consumer complaints was decided by the National Commission vide judgment and order dated 28.03.2019, which has been impugned herein. The National Commission has allowed the consumer complaints in terms of the earlier order passed in the Subodh Pawar case (supra). The National Commission recorded the statement of the counsel for the complainants that in order to avoid any further litigation, the complainants were restricting their claim for refund of the principal amount paid to the Developer, alongwith compensation @ 10% S.I. p.a. w.e.f. from 10.07.2017, which was awarded by this Court to another allottee in the same project as per Consent Order dated 28.01.2019 passed in Civil Appeal Diary No. 48101 of 2018.
15. We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties. The issues which have arisen for consideration are:
(i) Determination of the date from which the 42 months period for handing over possession is to be calculated under Clause 13.3, whether it would be from the date of issuance of the Fire NOC as contended by the Developer; or, from the date of sanction of the Building Plans, as contended by the Apartment Buyers;