MANU/SC/1212/2021
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 6778 of 2013
Decided On: 09.12.2021
Appellants: Jacob Punnen and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S. Ravindra Bhat and K.M. Joseph, JJ.
Subject: Insurance
Subject: Consumer
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution of India - Article 38, Constitution of India - Article 39(e), Constitution of India - Article 41, Constitution of India - Article 42, Constitution of India - Article 47; Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 2(g), Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 2(r); Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 20, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 22, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 182, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 185; Insurance Act, 1938 - Section 2(6C); Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Health Insurance) Regulations, 2016 - Regulation 3, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (Health Insurance) Regulations, 2016 - Regulation 11; Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999; International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1976 - Article 12; Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 - Article 25
Cases Referred:
Biman Krishna Bose v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0948/2001; United India Insurance Co. Limited and Ors. v. Manubhai Dharmasinhbhai Gajera and Ors. MANU/SC/7754/2008; Canara Bank v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0131/2020; Satwant Kaur Sandhu v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/1164/2009; Tarsem Singh v. Sukhminder Singh MANU/SC/0158/1998; The United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. M.K.J. Corporation MANU/SC/0113/1997; Modern Insulators Ltd. v. The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0117/2000; Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking v. Basanti Devi and Ors. MANU/SC/0621/1999; Chairman, Life Insurance Corporation and Ors. v. Rajiv Kumar Bhasker MANU/SC/0441/2005; Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Raja Vasireddy Komalavalli Kamba and Ors. MANU/SC/0186/1984; Reliance Life Insurance Co. Ltd. and Ors. v. Rekhaben Nareshbhai Rathod MANU/SC/0593/2019; Life Insurance Corporation of India and Ors. v. Asha Goel and Ors. MANU/SC/0804/2000; P.C. Chacko and Ors. v. Chairman, Life Insurance Corporation of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8115/2007; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and Ors. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Ors. MANU/SC/0439/1986; LIC of India and Ors. v. Consumer Education and Research Center and Ors. MANU/SC/0772/1995; C.E.S.C. Limited and Ors. v. Subhash Chandra Bose and Ors. MANU/SC/0466/1992; Sherdley v. Nordea Life and Pension MANU/UKWA/0802/2012 : (2012) 2 All ER (Comm) 725 : (2012) EWCA Civ 88; Pioneer Urban Land & Infrastructure Ltd. v. Govindan Raghavan MANU/SC/0463/2019 : 2019 (5) SCC 525
Authorities Referred:
Black's Law Dictionary, Ninth Edition, Page No. 368
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  16

Mentioned
  1

Case Note:
Consumer - Medical Insurance Policy (Mediclaim) - Claim raised - Partial amount released - Respondent cited period change in policy terms - Forum allowed the complaint - State Commission upset the findings of the Forum - National Commission upheld insurer's contention that renewed insurance policy being a fresh contract that reflected changes compared with the previous terms- Hence, the present appeal - Whether insurer was under an obligation to indicate or to intimidate to insured about the likely changes under its policies?

Facts:

The present appeal emanated from the pronouncements given by State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission and National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. The issue concerning present dispute was alleged unilateral change in medical policy renewed which as a result brought change in policy terms. Appellant cited no knowledge or information about the change being made and thus challenge the same.

Held, while allowing the Appeal:

S. RavindraBhat, J.

i.If the renewed contract is agreed, in all respects, by both parties, undoubtedly the fresh terms (with restrictions) would be binding. However, that would not be the case when a new term is introduced unilaterally about which the policy holder is in the dark. [19]

ii.It is evident that the Appellants could insist on the old insurance policy, on the premise that it renewed the pre-existing policy. The other conclusion would be cold comfort to the party seeking insurance cover, as the choice would be to avoid it altogether - too drastic as to constitute a choice. [22]

iii.Findings of the State Commission and the NCDRC cannot be sustained. The insurer was clearly under a duty to inform the Appellant policy holders about the limitations which it was imposing in the policy renewed for 2008-2009. Its failure to inform the policy holders resulted in deficiency of service. Consequently, the appeal is allowed.[40]

K.M. Joseph, J.

iv.Claim under the Consumer Protection Act must allowed on the ground that there has been a deficiency on the part of the Insurer. The Insurer brought about a change in the policy. This change introduced a cumbersome limitation. It kept the Insured in the dark about the limitation at the time when the renewal notice was issued, and what is more, the premium was accepted. The Insurer had a duty to inform the Appellants that a change regarding the limitation on its liability was being introduced. This duty to take the insured into confidence was breached. This was the deficiency in service. Even proceeding on the basis that the policy incorporates the terms of the contract, insofar as the Respondent insurer unilaterally purported to incorporate a clearly cumbersome limitation involving a breach of the duty to take the Appellants into confidence, the court would not be powerless to undo the wrong. Be it that the policy purported to incorporate the substantive limitation, the Appellant can be relieved of the result of the deficiency in service by the insured. This can be done by restoring the position, the Appellants would occupy if there was no breach. Appeal allowed on the basis that there was unjustifiable non-disclosure by the Insurer about the introduction of Clause of limitation and, in this case, it constituted a deficiency in service and resultantly the Appellants are entitled to relief.[46]

Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
JUDGMENT
Authored By : S. Ravindra Bhat, K.M. Joseph
S. Ravindra Bhat, J.
1. The Appellants challenge the order of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission ("the NCDRC")1 which upheld the concurrent rejection of their application seeking relief.
2. The undisputed facts are that the Appellants contracted with the Respondent (hereinafter referred to as "the insurer"), and secured a medical insurance policy (hereinafter referred to as "Mediclaim"), for the first time in 1982. The policy was annual and was renewed successively, each year by the Appellants by paying the appropriate premium - the last renewal policy forming the subject matter of the present appeal. The policy renewed by the Appellants on 28.03.2007 was in force for a year i.e., till 27.03.2008. Before the date of expiry of the Mediclaim (on 27.03.2008), the insurer sent a reminder to the Appellants to renew their policy, if they so wished, annually. The reminder also intimated the Appellants that the premium was ` 17,705/- and had to be paid by 27.03.2008. The Appellants paid the requisite amount by cheque (issued on 26.03.2008) and in this regard the receipt was received from the insurer on 30.03.2008. This receipt indicated that the insurance policy period would be operative from 28.03.2008 to 27.03.2009. The monetary coverage of the policy was ` 8,00,000/- (` 4,25,000/- for the first Appellant and ` 3,75,000/- for the second Appellant). The second Appellant had to undergo angioplasty in June (09.06.2008 to 12.06.2008) at Chennai. The Appellants submitted a claim for ` 3,82,705.27/- to the insurer, as amounts due under the contract of insurance policy, towards the expenses incurred by them. The insurer, however, accepted the claim and paid the partial amount by releasing ` 2,00,000/- to them.
3. Feeling aggrieved, the Appellants represented to the insurer, repeatedly and unavailingly to the insurer to make good the balance amount. Exhausted, the Appellants filed a complaint before the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum (hereafter "the District Forum"), Kottayam for a direction that the insurer ought to pay them ` 2,07,705/- along with costs and interests on the compensation.
4. The insurer's position before the District Forum was that the terms and conditions of Mediclaim policy changed periodically. The policy for the relevant year indicated that in respect of procedures (such as angioplasty), 70% of the policy limit could be claimed subject to an overall limit of ` 2,00,000/- for any one surgery or procedure. The insurer also argued that having been issued with the policy document which was accepted by the Appellants, the latter could not then complain that they were any amounts over and above the terms agreed upon.
5. The District Forum allowed the Appellants' complaint holding firstly that an insurance contract evidences a commercial transaction, and is to be construed like any other agreement, on its own terms subject to fulfillment of the conditions of uberrima fides i.e., utmost good faith by the parties and secondly that the insurer was under a duty to intimate to be insured with respect to change in terms before the renewal of the policy. On the basis of these findings, the District Forum directed the insurer to pay the Appellants, ` 1,75,000/- as the balance amount and also awarded ` 5,000/- as compensation. Aggrieved, the insurer approached the State Consumer Redressal Commission which by its order upset the findings of the Consumer Forum, holding that the terms of the policy were known to the Appellants who were bound by it. In these circumstances, the Appellants approached the NCDRC with a revision petition. The NCDRC upheld the insurer's contention that the insurance policy renewed by the Appellants on 28.03.2008 was a fresh contract entered into between the parties which reflected changes compared with the previous terms. These conditions - the NCDRC held - were known to the Appellants or were presumed to be known since they had claimed under that policy and that it was not open to them to claim ignorance of the terms under the fresh policy which had placed percentage and monetary cap on certain types of surgical procedures.
6. It is argued by the counsel for the Appellants Ms. Arundhati Katju that the State Forum and the NCDRC fell into error in holding that the Appellants were aware and were deemed to have been aware of the terms of the policy. It was emphasized that the Appellants had not applied and obtained a fresh policy but had rather renewed an existing policy - as they did earlier from time to time annually. Placing reliance on Biman Krishna Bose v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0948/2001 : (2001) 6 SCC 477, and United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Manubhai Dharmasinhbhai Gajera MANU/SC/7754/2008 : (2008) 10 SCC 404, it was argued that the renewal of an insurance policy would imply that the existing terms would bind the parties. As a consequence, the insurer being a party cannot impose unilateral changes, either at the point of time when the policy is renewed or during its currency.
7. Learned Counsel compared the terms of the previous policy (which had covered the period March 2007-March 2008) with the policy in question (for the period March 2008 to March 2009) and submitted that the overall limit of coverage was changed by the Appellants as compared to the previous year. It was also stated that the previous policy covered health risks of three individuals i.e., the Appellants and their son whereas the policy in question covered only the Appellants. Counsel submitted furthermore that the insurer had undeniably issued a notice pursuant to which a policy was renewed on 26.03.2008. In the circumstances, it was duty of the insurer to inform the insured of the likely change in coverage to enable them to explore an alternative i.e., to opt for a policy that would cover all risks more comprehensively, even if it were to cost them more. Counsel urged that in these circumstances, the insurer was clearly guilty of deficiency of service in as much as the insurer was in the dark about the nature of the limited coverage.
8. Learned Counsel on behalf of the insurer Mr. Amit Kumar urged this Court to uphold the finding of the NCDRC submitting that there was no deficiency in service by the Respondents. It was submitted that the Appellants never disputed that in fact the policy was dispatched pursuant to the renewal. A careful reading of the policy for the year 2008-2009 would have indicated that it differed radically from the policy from the previous year because of a term indicating a monetary limit on the reimbursable expenditure, by the insurer. In these circumstances, the Appellants could not place any blame upon the insurer.
9. It was submitted that the insurer was under no obligation to indicate or to intimidate to the Appellants about the likely changes under its policies. In other words, there was no duty in law which obliged the insurer to intimate the policy holder - at the point of time of renewal that the terms of the new policy would be different from those of the earlier, lapsed/expired policy. It was submitted that the term "renewal" has no special significance given that the contract of insurance i.e., policy in this case is the first annual one. Therefore, the policy for 2008-09 is a different contract of insurance from the one which preceded it. Learned Counsel submitted that the very circumstance that a higher coverage limit was indicated in respect of two individuals only as compared to three insured under the previous policy showed that the insurer had complied with the offer of the insured, who desired such coverage.
10. Learned Counsel for the insurer brought to the notice of this Court that the obligation of intimating the insured, has been spelt out in the Standardized General Terms and Clauses in Health Insurance Policy Contracts by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDA), in 2020. He submitted that the obligation to intimate stems out of Clause 14 which deals with the possibility of revision of terms of a policy including the premium rates. This clearly indicates that only the existing policy holder has to be notified. However, in renewal of same policy does not place any such obligation upon the insurer to intimate insured person at the point of renewal of the policy.
11. It was urged furthermore that the monetary cap of ` 2,00,000/- in the present case was not conjured by the insurer, which merely complied the IRDA's directions. In this regard, the learned Counsel submitted that insurer acted upon the IRDA's direction, which were communicated to its offices and branches by way of internal guidelines. Learned Counsel also submitted that at the point of time of renewal, no implied obligation on the part of the insurer can be inferred given that each transaction signifies a fresh contract of Insurance. In other words, it is up to the insured to inquire, if the terms of the renewed policy would be in any way would be different from the previous one.
Analysis and Conclusions
12. The previous policy2 indicated a limit of ` 3 lakhs each for the Appellants, and ` 1 lakh cover to Ajay Punnen Jacob (their son). The policy in question, i.e., for 2008-09 covered an overall limit of ` 8 lakhs (` 4,25,000/- for the first Appellant and ` 3,75,000/- for the second Appellant, his wife). A copy of the policy which has been produced indicates that the premium (including service tax) paid was ` 17,705/-. The period of insurance was from 00.00 hrs of 28.03.2008 to midnight of 27.03.2009. Clause 1.2 of the policy in question for 2008-09 indisputably introduced the following restrictive condition:
1.2 In the event of any claim(s) becoming admissible under this scheme, the company will pay through TPA to the Hospital/Nursing Home or the insured person the amount of such expenses as would fall under different heads mentioned below, and as are reasonably and necessarily incurred thereof by or on behalf of such Insured Person, but not exceeding the Sum Insured in aggregate mentioned in the Schedule hereto.
A) Room, Boarding Expenses as provided by the Hospital/nursing home.
B) Nursing Expenses.
C) Surgeon, Anaesthetist, Medical Practitioner, Consultants, Specialists Fees.
D) Anaesthetist, Blood, Oxygen, Operation Theatre Charges, surgical appliances, Medicines & Drugs, Diagnostic Materials and X-ray, Dialysis, Chemotherapy, Radiotherapy, Cost of Pacemaker, Artificial Limbs & Cost of organs and similar expenses.
Expenses in respect of the following specified illnesses will be restricted as detailed below:
(N.B: Company's Liability in respect of all claims admitted during the period of insurance shall not exceed the Sum Insured per person as mentioned in the schedule)
13. In the previous policy3 the stipulation, limiting for medical expenditure under various heads, were as follows:
1. In the event of any claim/s becoming admissible under this scheme, the company will pay through TPA to the Hospital/Nursing Home or the insured person the amount of such expenses as would fall under different heads mentioned below, and as are reasonably and necessarily incurred thereof by or on behalf of such Insured Person, but not exceeding the Sum Insured in aggregate mentioned in the Schedule herein.
A) Room, Boarding Expenses as provided by the Hospital/nursing home.
B) Nursing Expenses.
C) Surgeon, Anesthetist, Medical Practitioner, Consultants, Specialists Fees.
D) Anesthesia, Blood, Oxygen, Operation Theatre Charges, surgical appliances, Medicines & Drugs, Diagnostic Materials and X-ray.
E) Dialysis, Chemotherapy, Radiotherapy, Cost of Pacemaker, Artificial Limbs & Cost of organs and similar expenses.
(N.B: Company's Liability in respect of all claims admitted during the period of insurance shall not exceed the Sum Insured per person as mentioned in the schedule)
14. What is apparent from the record is that upon receipt of the renewed notice, sometime in March 2008, the Appellants issued a cheque dated 26.03.2008 which was duly received. That the cheque was encashed and a policy document issued by the insurer is not in dispute. Both parties, i.e., the first Appellant and the Divisional Manager of the insurer have filed affidavits in evidence. However, the pleadings as well as these affidavits are unclear as to when the policy document was actually despatched and received by the insurer and on which date it was received by the Appellants. Clearly, the policy containing the fresh terms was issued after receipt of the premium for the year 2008-09. In this regard, interestingly, the affidavit evidence of the insurer states as follows:
3. That it is stated that the Petitioners renewed their policy No. 100505/48/07/00002034 for the period 28.03.2008 to 27.03.2009 and received the terms of the policy which has been renamed as "United India Health Insurance Policy (Gold)". The total coverage of the policy was Rs. 8,00,000/- being Rs. 4,25,000/- for Petitioner No. 1 and Rs. 3,75,000/- for the Petitioner No. 2. The Petitioner received no claim discount of Rs. 3184.7 when renewing the same.
XXXXXXXX XXXXXXXX XXXXXXX
5. That it is stated that the Petitioners made representation vide letter dated 10.10.2008, to the Respondent claiming the entire amount of treatment from the Respondent and in reply dated 04.11.2008, it was stated that the insurance company in terms of the United India health insurance policy Gold was liable to pay to the insured 70% of the sum insured or Rs. 2,00,000/- whichever was less in case of angioplasty.
15. The insurer's counsel had, during the course of the hearing, relied upon a document titled 'Guidelines on Standardization of General Terms and Clauses in Health Insurance Policy Contracts' dated 11.06.2020 highlighting clauses 10 and 14 of the document. They are extracted below:
10. Renewal of Policy
The policy shall ordinarily be renewable except on grounds of fraud, misrepresentation by the insured person.
i. The Company shall endeavor to give notice for renewal. However, the Company is not under obligation to give any notice for renewal.
ii. Renewal shall not be denied on the ground that the insured person had made a claim or claims in the preceding policy years.
iii. Request for renewal along with requisite premium shall be received by the Company before the end of the policy period.
iv. At the end of the policy period, the policy shall terminate and can be renewed within the Grace Period of...... days (Note to insurers: Insurer to specify grace period as per product design) to maintain continuity of benefits without break in policy. Coverage is not available during the grace period.
v. No loading shall apply on renewals based on individual claims experience
XXXXXXX XXXXXXX XXXXXXX
14. Possibility of Revision of Terms of the Policy including the Premium Rates
The company, with prior approval of IRDAI, may revise or modify the terms of the policy including the premium rates. The insured person shall be notified three months before the changes are effected.
The insurer had also relied upon a copy of the United India Insurance Company administrative guidelines for the new insurance products effective 28.01.2007, especially para 14 which reads as follows:
14 RENEWALS OF EXISTING POLICIES
Existing Policyholders who are below the age of 35 years as on the date of introduction of this Product will be allowed to renew the Policy as Platinum. All other Policyholders will be brought under the Gold Policy.
An entrant into the Platinum Policy will be allowed to continue under the Policy even after he crosses 35 years. As on date the table is available upto the age of 45 years. This will be expanded based on the claims experience of the next two years.
In respect of Senior Citizens who are our existing policyholders, they will be allowed to renew the policy on existing terms and conditions but at revised rates of premium under Gold Policy. They should not be compelled to migrate to the new Scheme. If they so desire to enter the new Scheme, the same may be allowed on collection of fresh proposal.
Persons above the age of 60 years and taking a Health Policy for the first time can be granted the Senior Citizens Policy only.
Analysis:
The first point: on renewal
16. In the facts of the present appeal, the insurer insisted that the 2008-09 'Gold' policy was in fact a 'new' one, and not a renewal, which was available with the Appellants, before the second Appellant's surgery took place. There is some dispute on this aspect; the Appellants contended that the amended terms of the 2008-09 Gold policy were received only after three months of the payment of the renewal premium, and thus there was no scope for them to have read and given consent to the cap on angioplasty coverage in the new Gold policy.
17. The insurer had placed reliance on the administrative guidelines (supra) to highlight the Clause on renewal, in order to demonstrate that the 2008-09 Gold policy was a new insurance product, and not a renewal of the previous Mediclaim policy. However, the same Clause stated that, "In respect of senior citizens who are our existing policy holders, they will be allowed to renew the policy on existing terms and conditions but at revised rates of premium under Gold policy". The Clause further stated that, "They should not be compelled to migrate to the new (Gold) scheme. If they so desire to enter the new scheme, the same may be allowed on collection of fresh proposal".
18. In such a situation, there can be said to be no consensus ad idem on the introduction of the cap on the coverage by the insurer, as the Appellants were not informed that they had paid premium for a new policy, but were led to believe that they had in fact renewed a pre-existing policy on the same terms, with only difference being the removal of their son as a beneficiary and a higher coverage (from Rupees 6 lakhs to Rupees 8 lakhs in total) for the Appellants, which was accepted by the insurer. The general Rule of acceptance of an insurance proposal by the assured involves unconditional acceptance of all the terms.4 Thus the cap on the coverage placed by the insurer without prior intimation to the assured and without providing an opportunity to the assured to seek alternate insurance policies that were more favourable to their needs was restrictive, and thus not enforceable.
19. In these circumstances, this Court is of the opinion that the eventuality contemplated in Biman Krishna Bose (supra), i.e., inapplicability of old terms, in the cases of renewal, when the contracts provide "or otherwise", has to be applied contextually. If the renewed contract is agreed, in all respects, by both parties, undoubtedly the fresh terms (with restrictions) would be binding. However, that would not be the case when a new term is introduced unilaterally about which the policy holder is in the dark. Further, the allusion to continuation of the terms of the Gold policy in respect of senior citizens (who were not to be compelled to migrate to another policy) but were to be subject to the same terms, upon payment of a different rate of premia, reinforces the conclusion that there was in fact, a renewal of the existing terms.
20. Arguendo, assuming the Appellants had received the policy documents on time, i.e., requisite disclosure had been made, and then the Appellants had in fact misunderstood the terms and mistaken the new Gold policy for the previous policy, the question is, post payment of premium, were they in a position to protest, or do anything about it. Irrespective of the answer to the question of whether the renewal of an insurance contract results in a new contract or otherwise, the issue which arises is whether the Appellants, as beneficiaries of the policy, could complain about mistake in its terms, and the possible consequences of such mistake.
21. There cannot be any gainsaying to the fact that if parties are not agreed on the terms, one of the likely results would be its avoidance. "Mistake" is not defined, under the Contract Act, 1872; however, Section 22 of the Act5 enacts that a unilateral mistake of fact, does not result in its nullity. The general law on avoidance of a contract was explained by this Court in Canara Bank v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. MANU/SC/0131/2020 : (2020) 3 SCC 455 in the following terms:
[T]o make a contract void, the non-disclosure should be of some very material fact. No doubt, it would have been better if the Bank and the insured had given at least one tripartite agreement to the Insurance Company but, in our view, in the peculiar facts of this case, not disclosing the tripartite agreement or the names of the owners cannot be said to be such a material fact as to make the policy void or voidable. We are clearly of the view that there is no fraudulent claim made. There is no false declaration made and neither is the loss and damage occasioned by any wilful act or connivance of the insured.