MANU/SC/0067/1980
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition No. 214 of 1979
Decided On: 28.01.1980
Appellants: Jagadish Saran and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI)
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
O. Chinnappa Reddy, R.S. Pathak and V.R. Krishna Iyer, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: S. Balakrishnan and M.K.D. Namboodiri, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: Lal Narain Sinha, Attorney General and A. Subhashini, Adv. for Respondent No. 1, Shanti Bhushan, Jitender Sharma, V.P. Chaudhary and R.L. Gupta, Advs. for Respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 5
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 141, Constitution Of India - Article 15(4), Constitution Of India - Article 29(2), Constitution Of India - Article 32
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 14; Constitution of India - Article 15, Constitution of India - Article 16, Constitution of India - Article 29(2)
Cases Referred:
State of Kerala and Anr. vs. N.M. Thomas and Ors. MANU/SC/0479/1975; D.N. Chanchala Ors. vs. The State of Mysore and Ors. MANU/SC/0040/1971; Minor P. Rajendran vs. State of Madras and Ors. MANU/SC/0025/1968; The State of Jammu & Kashmir vs. Shri Triloki Nath Khosa and Ors. MANU/SC/0401/1973
Disposition:
Petition Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  4

Mentioned
  2

Case Note:

Constitution - reservation - Articles 14, 15, 16, 29, 32 and 136 of Constitution of India - petition against reservation of 70% of seats at post-graduate level to Delhi graduates - sufficient validity found in consideration for reservation to Delhi medical graduates - not beyond reason that student who enters medical college for his graduate studies and pursues them for requisite period of years should prefer on graduation to continue in same institution for his post-graduate studies - reservation strictly institutional based - institutional preference in present case does not offend constitutional guarantee of equality - hence petition dismissed.
JUDGMENT
Authored By : V.R. Krishna Iyer, R.S. Pathak
V.R. Krishna Iyer, J.
1. Many a case in this Court is the dramatisation. on the forensic stage, of social stress or community conflict which seeks resolution or release through the litigative process. This Writ Petition turns the focus on one such tense issue and ventilates a widespread grievance which deserves constitutional examination.
2. The petitioner, Dr. Ramesh, is a medical graduate from the Madras University. His father, an officer under the Central Government, was transferred to Delhi and the son, desirous of taking a post-graduate degree in Dermatology, applied for admission to the University of Delhi which offers that course. He took the common entrance test and secured enough marks to qualify for admission but was turned down because of a rule reserving 70% of the seats, at the post-graduate level, to Delhi graduates (if we may use that abbreviation for describing student-applicants who have taken their M.B.B.S. degree from the University of Delhi). The remaining 30% was open to all, including graduates of Delhi. This rule was made in April 1978 in modification of the earlier reservation of 48%.
3. Had this inflation (from 48% to 70% plus) not been made, the petitioner admittedly would have been granted admission. So what blocked his right to post-graduate entry was this rule of institutional quota of 70% which accorded a disproportionate premium in favour of Delhi graduates. The other petitioners are no longer in the race having secured lesser marks at the entrance test, and so the judicial lens must be fixed on the validity of such a considerable reservation or virtual monopoly for the Delhi graduates. The petitioner challenges its vires as violative of Articles 14 to 16 and seeks the court's writ to direct the respondent University to admit him to the M.D. course (Dermatology). While litigating for his right to a seat in the post-graduate degree course in dermatology, he is now doing his diploma course in the same subject in the same University, which is inferior to his aspiration and entitlement if the right to equality is fatal to the quota policy.
4. We are not investigating the plea based on Article 16 because it is not clear whether the stipend paid to a post-graduate student makes the course an employment and, apart from that, the meat of the matter is whether there is discrimination. If there is, Articles 14 and 15 are lethal enough, without resort to Article 16.
5. The University of Delhi (we may use the shorthand form Delhi University' hereafter) refutes this challenge and justifies the reservation in the concrete educational plight of Delhi graduates as an inevitable evil, if it be evil because of the exclusivism practised by every other university. An institutional quota is not invariably a constitutional anathema and, in the present case, the Delhi University offers an explanation for this recourse to higher institutional reservation. Many universities now adopt the exclusionary or segregative device of de facto monopoly of seats for higher medical courses to its own alumni, Indians from other Indian Universities being treated as aliens. This xenophobic trend has forced the Delhi University to reciprocate with high reservation.
6. If reservation of seats, as a strategy of admission to technical colleges, is void there may be a wider impact on a number of the institutions and individuals than on the parties here. The law laid down by this Court binds other institutions because Article 141 is imperative. Sri Shanti Bhushan, appearing for the University, assertively suggested to the contrary remembering only the rule of res judicata, but later realised the obvious error and recanted. He agreed that if this Court invalidated reservation, as such, many universities would be upset in their admission processes, although they were not party-a weakness of the adversary system which needs remedying. So, we invited the learned Attorney General also to help the Court, which he did and we record our gratitude. Unfortunately, the petitioner has not been able to present, the social facts, the educational milieu, the statistical materials and other vital data bearing on the constitutional vice of the rule of excessive reservation, and the respondent University, despite our repeated suggestions to its counsel, has not enriched its brief with sufficient facts which enlighten the court, although some additional information has been brought in. On the other hand, counsel's submissions were scary, if we may say so with respect, to the effect that when students went on a fast unto death, Government had to intervene and save the situation and provide larger reservation. As the Attorney General agreed, hunger strikes cannot amend the Constitution, and Government, if impressed with the grievance which has led to the protest fast, must set in motion changes in the basic law, as was done in the first constitutional amendment and later for States Reorganisation. When this flaw was pointed out to the respondent, some more materials were placed before the court in justification of the increase in the reservation quota from a constitutional angle, and we will deal with them. In the adversary system, advocacy in the superior courts, which, their decisions, declare the law for all must broaden beyond the particular Us into a conspectus of sociological facts, economic factors and educational conditions so that other persons aggrieved who will potentially be bound by the decision, do not suffer by not being co-nominee parties. Surely, on the available material, counsel have done their best.
7. This preliminary narration leads upto the constitutional problem that confronts the court in this petition under Article 32 and stresses how it deserves, for its solution, serious and sensitive judicial and administrative statesmanship enlivened by legal fundamentals, since the crucial issue springs from the pervasive and protective tendency for institutional reservation of post-graduate seats, which, if left uncanalised and indulged in excess, may well imperil the integrated status of higher national education and make a mockery of equal opportunity. Basically, great constitutional issues cannot be divorced, even while being viewed from a legal perspective, from their national overtones and individual impact, since passionate provincialisation and addiction to institutional xenophobia, even in higher education, have a suicidal fascination beyond myopic political perception. And, on the contrary, elitist exaggeration of 'national' considerations and personal merit, where local protection is essential for the humbler people's interests, has a depressing repercussion if pushed beyond a point-an aspect which expert policy-makers sometimes overlook in unwitting promotion of their group interest. The problem is complex and thorny, charged with practical difficulties and fraught with explosive possibilies. A short cut, in such situations may well prove a wrong cut and so we are circumspect in our assessment and tentative in our conclusions, especially because counsel, in our adversary system, often do not travel beyond the narrow needs of the case and, despite our prodding, we have not received the social-statistical wealth of material to help us take a comprehensive overview of the issue. Law, constitutional law, is not an omnipotent abstraction or distant idealisation but a principled, yet pragmatic, value-laden and result-oriented, set of propositions applicable to and conditioned by a concrete stage of social development of the nation and aspirational imperatives of the people. India To-day-that is the inarticulate major premise of our constitutional law and life.