MANU/SC/0912/2020
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Criminal Appeal Nos. 824-825 of 2020 (Arising from SLP (Criminal) Nos. 2640-2641/2020) and Criminal Appeal No. 826 of 2020 (Arising from SLP (Criminal) No. 4549/2020)
Decided On: 03.12.2020
Appellants: Jayant and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: The State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Ashok Bhushan and M.R. Shah, JJ.
Subject: Criminal
Subject: Mines and Minerals
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 156(3); Mines And Minerals (Development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 22; Mines And Minerals (Development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23A
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 190; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 87, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 156(3), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 157, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 167(b), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 173, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 173(2), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 190, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 190(1), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 190(2), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 191, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 192, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 193, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 194, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 195, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 196, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 196(1A), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 197, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 198, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 199, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 200, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 201, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 202, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 203, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 204, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 204(1), Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 482; Constitution of India - Article 39(b), Constitution of India - Article 48A, Constitution of India - Article 51A; Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 161, Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 165, Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 378, Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 379, Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 414; Mines And Minerals (development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 4, Mines And Minerals (development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 15, Mines And Minerals (development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 21, Mines And Minerals (development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 22, Mines And Minerals (development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23A, Mines And Minerals (development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23A(1), Mines And Minerals (development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23A(2); Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 - Section 19(1); M.P. Minerals (Prevention of illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2006 - Rule 18; Madhya Pradesh Minor Mineral Rules, 1996 - Rule 53; Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947
Cases Referred:
State of NCT of Delhi and Ors. v. Sanjay and Ors. MANU/SC/0761/2014; M. Palanisamy v. The State of Tamil Nadu MANU/TN/1408/2012; M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath and Ors. MANU/SC/1007/1997; Intellectuals Forum, Tirupathi v. State of A.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/8047/2006; A.R. Antulay v. Ramdas Sriniwas Nayak and Ors. MANU/SC/0082/1984; Manohar M. Galani v. Ashok N. Advani and Ors. MANU/SC/0723/1999; S.K. Sinha v. Videocon International Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/7011/2008; Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs v. Abani Kumar Banerjee MANU/WB/0167/1950; R.R. Chari v. The State of Uttar Pradesh MANU/SC/0025/1951; Narayandas Bhagwandas Madhavdas v. The State of West Bengal MANU/SC/0054/1959; Ajit Kumar Palit v. State of West Bengal MANU/SC/0153/1962; Hareram Satpathy v. Tikaram Agarwala and Ors. MANU/SC/0091/1978; Gopal Das Sindhi and Ors. v. The State of Assam and Ors. MANU/SC/0413/1961; Nirmaljit Singh Hoon v. The State of West Bengal and Ors. MANU/SC/0196/1972; Darshan Singh Ram Kishan v. The State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0089/1971; Devarapalli Lakshminarayana Reddy and Ors. v. V. Narayana Reddy and Ors. MANU/SC/0108/1976; M.L. Sethi v. R.P. Kapur and Ors. MANU/SC/0098/1966; Fakhruddin Ahmad v. State of Uttaranchal and Ors. MANU/SC/8020/2008; Emperor v. Sourindra Mohan Chuckerbutty MANU/WB/0016/1910; Subramanian Swamy v. Manmohan Singh and Ors. MANU/SC/0067/2012; State of West Bengal and Ors. v. Mohammed Khalid and Ors. MANU/SC/0154/1995; State of Karnataka and Ors. v. Pastor P. Raju MANU/SC/3533/2006; Anil Kumar and Ors. v. M.K. Aiyappa and Ors. MANU/SC/1002/2013; State of U.P. v. Paras Nath Singh MANU/SC/0973/2009; Kanwar Pal Singh v. State of U.P. Criminal Appeal No. 1920 of 2019; Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India MANU/SC/0089/2012 : (2012) 3 SCC 1; Krishna Pillai v. T.A. Rajendran 1990 (Supp) SCC 121; Chief Enforcement Officer v. Videocon International Ltd.
Authorities Referred:
Black's Law Dictionary
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  5

Mentioned
  22

Relied On
  1

Case Note:
Criminal - Illegal Mining and transportation of minor minerals - Registration of FIR - Suo Moto Action - Quashing of FIR - Sections 156(3), 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Offence committed punishable under Sections 379 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Sections 4, 21 of the Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDR Act) and Rule 18 of the M.P. Minerals (Prevention of illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2006 (2006 Rules) - Ratio of State (NCT of Delhi) v. Sanjay followed to direct registration of FIRs - Quashing of FIR sought also on the plea that provision of compounding since available in Mineral Rules, FIR registration is not justified - Whether the suomoto action directed to register FIR in such cases justified?

Facts:

In the instant case, on a surprise inspection, the respective Mining Inspectors checked the tractor/trolleys of the private Appellants along with the minor mineral loaded in them. They handed over the tractor/trolleys to the concerned police stations to keep them in safe custody. Finding the private Appellants indulged in illegal mining/transportation of minor mineral, the mining Inspectors prepared their respective cases under Rule 53 of the Madhya Pradesh Minor Mineral Rules, 1996 (1996 Rules) and submitted them before the Mining Officers with a proposal of compounding the same for the amount calculated according to the concerned 1996 Rules. The concerned Mining Officers submitted those cases before the Collector, who approved the proposal. The violators accepted the decision and deposited the amounts determined by the Collector for compounding the cases. Their tractor/trolleys along with the minerals were released. However, later, based on one news publication, it came up that despite the offences under Sections 379 and 414, IPC and the offences under the MMDR Act and the 2006 Rules were found attracted, necessary legal action were not taken and the violators were permitted to go on compounding the offence under Rule 53 of the 1996 Rules. The learned Judicial Magistrate referred decision taken in the case of State (NCT of Delhi) v. Sanjay taking the view that such offences are distinct and different and it is permissible to lodge/initiate the proceedings for the offences under the Indian Penal Code as well as under the MMDR Act, the learned Magistrate under Section 156(3), Code of Criminal Procedure (suomotu) directed to register criminal case for initiation of investigation. Pursuant to this, separate FIRs for the offences of illegal mining/transportation of sand registered. Plea for quashing of FIRs was rejected. Hence, the present appeals.

Held, while dismissing the Appeals:

i.High Court has not committed any error in not quashing the order passed by the learned Magistrate and not quashing the criminal proceedings for the offences under Sections 379 and 414. [10]

ii.In the light of the relevant provisions of the MMDR Act and the Rules made thereunder vis-Ã -vis the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Penal Code, and the law laid down by this Court in the cases referred, it was concluded that i) that the learned Magistrate can in exercise of powers under Section 156(3) of the Code order/direct the concerned In-charge/SHO of the police station to lodge/register crime case/FIR even for the offences under the MMDR Act and the Rules made thereunder and at this stage the bar under Section 22 of the MMDR Act shall not be attracted;ii) the bar Under Section 22 of the MMDR Act shall be attracted only when the learned Magistrate takes cognizance of the offences under the MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder and orders issuance of process/summons for the offences under the MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder;iii) for commission of the offence under the Indian Penal Code, on receipt of the police report, the Magistrate having jurisdiction can take cognizance of the said offence without awaiting the receipt of complaint that may be filed by the authorised officer for taking cognizance in respect of violation of various provisions of the MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder; andiv) in respect of violation of various provisions of the MMDR Act and the Rules made thereunder, when a Magistrate passes an order under Section 156(3) of the Code and directs the concerned In-charge/SHO of the police station to register/lodge the crime case/FIR in respect of the violation of various provisions of the Act and Rules made thereunder and thereafter after investigation the concerned In-charge of the police station/investigating officer submits a report, the same can be sent to the concerned Magistrate as well as to the concerned authorised officer as mentioned in Section 22 of the MMDR Act and thereafter the concerned authorised officer may file the complaint before the learned Magistrate along with the report submitted by the concerned investigating officer and thereafter it will be open for the learned Magistrate to take cognizance after following due procedure, issue process/summons in respect of the violations of the various provisions of the MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder and at that stage it can be said that cognizance has been taken by the learned Magistrate; v) in a case where the violator is permitted to compound the offences on payment of penalty as per Sub-section 1 of Section 23A, considering Sub-section 2 of Section 23A of the MMDR Act, there shall not be any proceedings or further proceedings against the offender in respect of the offences punishable under the MMDR Act or any Rule made thereunder so compounded. However, the bar Under Sub-section 2 of Section 23A shall not affect any proceedings for the offences under the Indian Penal Code, such as, Sections 379 and 414 Indian Penal Code and the same shall be proceeded with further.[13]

iii.Appeals filed by the violators/private Appellants partly allowed, to the extent quashing the proceedings for the offences under the MMDR Act - Sections 4/21 of the MMDR Act only. The appeal preferred by the State of Madhya Pradesh stands dismissed.[14]

JUDGMENT
M.R. Shah, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order dated 11.05.2020 passed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Bench at Indore in M. Cr.C. No. 49338/2019 and M. Cr.C. No. 49972/2019, the original Petitioner as well as the State of Madhya Pradesh have preferred the present appeals.
By the impugned common judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed the aforesaid applications filed Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure to quash the respective FIRs for the offences Under Sections 379 and 414, Indian Penal Code, Sections 4/21 of the Mines & Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the 'MMDR Act') and Under Rule 18 of the M.P. Minerals (Prevention of illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the '2006 Rules').
3. The facts in nutshell are as under:
On a surprise inspection, the respective Mining Inspectors checked the tractor/trolleys of the private Appellants along with the minor mineral (sand/storage/yellow soil etc.) loaded in them. They handed over the tractor/trolleys to the concerned police stations to keep them in safe custody. Finding the private Appellants indulged in illegal mining/transportation of minor mineral, the mining Inspectors prepared their respective cases Under Rule 53 of the Madhya Pradesh Minor Mineral Rules, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the '1996 Rules') and submitted them before the Mining Officers with a proposal of compounding the same for the amount calculated according to the concerned 1996 Rules. The concerned Mining Officers submitted those cases before the Collector, who approved the proposal. The violators accepted the decision and deposited the amounts determined by the Collector for compounding the cases. Their tractor/trolleys along with the minerals, which were illegally excavated/transported, were released.
3.1. That after some time, a news was published in a daily newspaper - Bhaskar on 8.9.2019 with respect to illegal excavation/transportation of mineral sand from Chambal, Shivna and Retam and other Tributary rivers flow from District Mandsuar and in surrounding places. It was revealed that due to illegal transportation of the minerals and without payment of royalty, revenue loss is occurring. It was reported that illegal mining, storage and transportation of mineral sand was being carried out at large scale. Similar kind of information was also subsequently published on 3.10.2019 in the daily newspaper - Bhaskar in Mandsuar edition. It was also reported that despite the offences Under Sections 379 and 414, Indian Penal Code and the offences under the MMDR Act and the 2006 Rules were found attracted, necessary legal action has not been taken and the violators were permitted to go on compounding the offence Under Rule 53 of the 1996 Rules. The learned Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Mandsuar took note of the aforesaid information and having taken note of the decision of this Court in the case of State (NCT of Delhi) v. Sanjay, MANU/SC/0761/2014 : (2014) 9 SCC 772 taking the view that offences under the Indian Penal Code and offences under the MMDR Act are distinct and different and it is permissible to lodge/initiate the proceedings for the offences under the Indian Penal Code as well as under the MMDR Act, the learned Magistrate in exercise of powers conferred Under Section 156(3), Code of Criminal Procedure (suo motu) directed to register criminal case Under Section 156(3) Code of Criminal Procedure for initiation of investigation and for submitting of report after due investigation is conducted. The learned Magistrate also directed the concerned In-charge/SHOs of the concerned police stations to register the first information report and a copy of the first information report be sent to the learned Magistrate as per the provisions of Section 157, Code of Criminal Procedure.
3.2. That pursuant to the order passed by the learned Magistrate, the In-charge/SHOs of the concerned police stations lodged separate FIRs for the aforesaid offences for illegal mining/transportation of sand, particulars of which are as under:
3.3. That thereafter the private Appellants and others approached the High Court to quash the aforesaid FIRs registered against them for illegal mining/transportation of sand by submitting the applications Under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure. It was mainly contended on behalf of the private Appellants and other violators that in view of Bar Under Section 22 of the MMDR Act, the order passed by the learned Magistrate directing to register the FIRs is unsustainable and deserves to the quashed and set aside. It was also contended on behalf of the private Appellants and other violators that once there was compounding of offence in exercise of powers Under Rule 53 of the 1996 Rules and the violators paid the amount determined by permitting them to compound the offence, thereafter the Magistrate was not justified in directing to initiate fresh proceedings which would be hit by the principle of "double jeopardy". That by the impugned common judgment and order, the High Court has dismissed all the aforesaid applications relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of Sanjay (supra).
4. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the common impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court in refusing to quash the FIRs filed against the private Appellants and other violators, the original Petitioners - violators have preferred the present appeals. Though, before the High Court, the learned Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh supported the order passed by the learned Magistrate directing to register/lodge FIRs, the State has preferred a separate special leave petition challenging the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court confirming the order passed by the learned Magistrate. It is very surprising that despite supporting the order passed by the learned Magistrate before the High Court, the State of Madhya Pradesh has preferred the special leave petition, which shall be dealt with hereinbelow.
5. Shri Devadatt Kamat, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the private Appellants has made following submissions:
i) initiation of criminal proceedings and filing of respective FIRs against the private Appellants which have been filed/lodged pursuant to the order passed by the learned Magistrate in exercise of powers Under Section 156(3), Code of Criminal Procedure are hit by Section 22 and 23A of the MMDR Act, as well as, Rule 53 of the 1996 Rules;
ii) on a plain reading of Section 22, cognizance of the offence can be taken by the Magistrate only if there is a written complaint in that regard by the Mining Officer/authorised officer. In the present case, admittedly, there is no written complaint made by the Mining Officer/authorised officer;
iii) MMDR Act does not contemplate the taking of suo motu cognizance by the Magistrate. The Magistrate does not have jurisdiction under the MMDR Act to direct the Mining Officer/police officer in-charge to register FIR under the penal provisions of the MMDR Act. Heavy reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Sanjay (Supra), as well as, in the case of Kanwar Pal Singh v. State of U.P., Criminal Appeal No. 1920 of 2019, decided on December 18, 2019;
iv) Section 23A of the MMDR Act contemplates the compounding of offence under the MMDR Act. Therefore, the Rules made under the MMDR Act contain provisions for compounding of offence. Sub-section 2 of Section 23A places a bar on proceedings or further proceedings, when the offences have been compounded Under Sub-section (1). Therefore, once the proceedings have been compounded under the Act or Rules made thereunder, no further proceedings can lie. In the present case, the offences under the MMDR Act as against the private Appellants were permitted to be compounded by the competent authority.
5.1. Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decisions of this Court, it is prayed to allow the present appeals and quash the criminal proceedings initiated against the private Appellants for the offences Under Sections 379 and 414, Indian Penal Code and Sections 4/21 of the MMDR Act.
6. Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh has supported the private Appellants - violators and has submitted that the order passed by the learned Magistrate directing to lodge/register FIRs for the offences Under Sections 379 and 414, Indian Penal Code and Sections 4/21 of the MMDR Act is unsustainable, though and as observed hereinabove, the learned Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of the State of Madhya Pradesh supported the order passed by the learned Magistrate before the High Court.
One of the grounds stated in the memo of appeal is that the order passed by the learned Magistrate, confirmed by the High Court, impinges/affects the powers of the authorised person to compound the offence Under Rule 18 of the 2006 Rules.
7. Before submissions made on behalf of the respective parties are considered, the decision of this Court in the case of Sanjay (supra) dealing with the provisions of the MMDR Act in which this Court considered in detail the policy and object of the MMDR Act and the Rules made thereunder, is required to be referred to.
7.1. The question which arose for consideration before this Court was, whether the provisions contained in Sections 21, 22 and other Sections of the MMDR Act operate as bar against prosecution of a person who has been charged with allegation which constitutes offences Under Sections 379/414 and other provisions of the Penal Code (IPC). The question which arose was, whether the provisions of the MMDR Act explicitly or impliedly exclude the provisions of the Penal Code (IPC) when the act of an Accused is an offence both under the Penal Code and under the provisions of the MMDR Act. This Court considered in detail the policy, object and purpose of the MMDR Act in paragraphs 32 to 39, which read as under:
32. The policy and object of the Mines and Minerals Act and Rules have a long history and are the result of an increasing awareness of the compelling need to restore the serious ecological imbalance and to stop the damages being caused to the nature. The Court cannot lose sight of the fact that adverse and destructive environmental impact of sand mining has been discussed in the UNEP Global Environmental Alert Service Report. As per the contents of the Report, lack of proper scientific methodology for river sand mining has led to indiscriminate sand mining, while weak governance and corruption have led to widespread illegal mining. While referring to the proposition in India, it was stated that sand trading is a lucrative business, and there is evidence of illegal trading such as the case of the influential mafias in our country.
33. The mining of aggregates in rivers has led to severe damage to rivers, including pollution and changes in levels of PH. Removing sediment from rivers causes the river to cut its channel through the bed of the valley floor, or channel incision, both upstream and downstream of the extraction site. This leads to coarsening of bed material and lateral channel instability. It can change the riverbed itself. The removal of more than 12 million tonnes of sand a year from Vembanad Lake catchment in India has led to the lowering of the riverbed by 7 to 15 cm a year. Incision can also cause the alluvial aquifer to drain to a lower level, resulting in a loss of aquifer storage. It can also increase flood frequency and intensity by reducing flood Regulation capacity. However, lowering the water table is most threatening to water supply exacerbating drought occurrence and severity as tributaries of major rivers dry up when sand mining reaches certain thresholds. Illegal sand mining also causes erosion. Damming and mining have reduced sediment delivery from rivers to many coastal areas, leading to accelerated beach erosion.
34. The Report also dealt with the astonishing impact of sand mining on the economy. It states that tourism may be affected through beach erosion. Fishing, both traditional and commercial, can be affected through destruction of benthic fauna. Agriculture could be affected through loss of agricultural land from river erosion and the lowering of the water table. The insurance sector is affected through exacerbation of the impact of extreme events such as floods, droughts and storm surges through decreased protection of beach fronts. The erosion of coastal areas and beaches affects houses and infrastructure. A decrease in bed load or channel shortening can cause downstream erosion including bank erosion and the undercutting or undermining of engineering structures such as bridges, side protection walls and structures for water supply.
35. Sand is often removed from beaches to build hotels, roads and other tourism-related infrastructure. In some locations, continued construction is likely to lead to an unsustainable situation and destruction of the main natural attraction for visitors--beaches themselves. Mining from, within or near a riverbed has a direct impact on the stream's physical characteristics, such as channel geometry, bed elevation, substratum composition and stability, instream roughness of the bed, flow velocity, discharge capacity, sediment transportation capacity, turbidity, temperature, etc. Alteration or modification of the above attributes may cause hazardous impact on ecological equilibrium of riverine regime. This may also cause adverse impact on instream biota and riparian habitats. This disturbance may also cause changes in channel configuration and flow paths.
36. In M. Palanisamy v. State of T.N. MANU/TN/1408/2012 : (2012) 4 CTC 1, the amended provisions of the Tamil Nadu Mines and Minerals Concession Rules, 1959 was challenged on the ground that the said Rules for the purpose of preventing and restricting illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals are ultra vires constitutional provisions and the provisions of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. Upholding the vires of the Rules, the Division Bench (one of us, Eqbal, J. as he then was) of the Madras High Court, elaborately discussed the object of restriction put in the illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals including sand and after considering various reports observed thus: (CTC pp. 24-25, paras 21 & 23-24)
21. In order to appreciate the issue involved in these writ petitions, we may have to look at the larger picture -- the impact of indiscriminate, uninterrupted sand quarrying on the already brittle ecological set-up of ours. According to expert reports, for thousands of years, sand and gravel have been used in the construction of roads and buildings. Today, demand for sand and gravel continues to increase. Mining operators, instead of working in conjunction with cognizant resource agencies to ensure that sand mining is conducted in a responsible manner, are engaged in full-time profiteering. Excessive in-stream sand and gravel mining from riverbeds and like resources causes the degradation of rivers. In-stream mining lowers the stream bottom, which leads to bank erosion. Depletion of sand in the stream-bed and along coastal areas causes the deepening of rivers and estuaries and enlargement of river mouths and coastal inlets. It also leads to saline water intrusion from the nearby sea. The effect of mining is compounded by the effect of sea level rise. Any volume of sand exported from stream-beds and coastal areas is a loss to the system. Excessive in-stream sand mining is a threat to bridges, river banks and nearby structures. Sand mining also affects the adjoining groundwater system and the uses that local people make of the river. Further, according to researches, in-stream sand mining results in the destruction of aquatic and riparian habitat through wholesale changes in the channel morphology. The ill effects include bed degradation, bed coarsening, lowered water tables near the stream-bed and channel instability. These physical impacts cause degradation of riparian and aquatic biota and may lead to the undermining of bridges and other structures. Continued extraction of sand from riverbeds may also cause the entire stream-bed to degrade to the depth of excavation.
***
23. The most important effects of in-stream sand mining on aquatic habitats are bed degradation and sedimentation, which can have substantial negative effects on aquatic life. The stability of sand-bed and gravel-bed streams depends on a delicate balance between stream flow, the sediments supplied from the watershed and the channel form. Mining-induced changes in sediment supply and channel form disrupt the channel and the habitat development processes. Furthermore, movement of unstable substrates results in downstream sedimentation of habitats. The affected distance depends on the intensity of mining, particle sizes, stream flows, and channel morphology.
24. Apart from threatening bridges, sand mining transforms the riverbeds into large and deep pits; as a result, the groundwater table drops leaving the drinking water wells on the embankments of these rivers dry. Bed degradation from in-stream mining lowers the elevation of stream flow and the floodplain water table, which in turn, can eliminate water table-dependent woody vegetation in riparian areas and decrease wetted periods in riparian wetlands. So far as locations close to the sea are concerned, saline water may intrude into the fresh waterbody.
37. In Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India MANU/SC/0089/2012 : (2012) 3 SCC 1, this Court, while observing that the natural resources are the public property and national assets, held as under: (SCC p. 53, para 75)
75. The State is empowered to distribute natural resources. However, as they constitute public property/national asset, while distributing natural resources the State is bound to act in consonance with the principles of equality and public trust and ensure that no action is taken which may be detrimental to public interest. Like any other State action, constitutionalism must be reflected at every stage of the distribution of natural resources. In Article 39(b) of the Constitution it has been provided that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community should be so distributed so as to best subserve the common good, but no comprehensive legislation has been enacted to generally define natural resources and a framework for their protection. Of course, environment laws enacted by Parliament and State Legislatures deal with specific natural resources i.e. forest, air, water, coastal zones, etc.