MANU/SC/1654/2006
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 1732 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 8588 of 2005] and Civil Appeal No. 1733 of 2006 [Arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 10703-10704 of 2005]
Decided On: 24.03.2006
Appellants:Kerala Samsthana Chethu Thozhilali Union
Vs.
Respondent:State of Kerala and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and P.K. Balasubramanyan, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: C.K. Sasi and Malini Poduval, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: Uday Umesh Lalit, Sr. Adv., K.R. Sasiprabhu, Roy Abraham, M.P. Vinod, Seema Jain, Himinder Lal, Romy Chacko and P.V. Dinesh, Advs.
Subject: Labour and Industrial
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 - Section 25 FFF; INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 - Section 25 J
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Central Excise Act, 1944 (repealed) - Section 3; Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 19(6), Constitution Of India - Article 311, Constitution Of India - Article 368, Constitution Of India - Article 39, Constitution Of India - Article 42, Constitution Of India - Article 43, Constitution Of India - Article 47; Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 23; Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 - Section 25FFF, Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 - Section 25J
Cases Referred:
Anil Kumar v. State of Kerala MANU/KE/0372/2004; Har Shankar and Ors. v. Dy. Excise and Taxation Commr. and Ors. MANU/SC/0321/1975; Jage Ram v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0571/1971; Bhajan Lal v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0384/1970; State of M.P. and Ors. v. Nandlal Jaiswal and Ors. MANU/SC/0034/1986; Khoday Distilleries Ltd. and Ors. v. State of Karnataka and Ors. MANU/SC/0572/1995; Ashok Lanka and Anr. v. Rishi Dixit and Ors. MANU/SC/0389/2005; Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co. Ltd. v. Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors. MANU/SC/1197/2006; Secy., Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Govt. of India v. Cipla Ltd. MANU/SC/0514/2003; Clariant International Ltd. and Anr. v. Securities & Exchange Board of India MANU/SC/0694/2004; State of Rajasthan and Ors. v. Basant Nahata MANU/SC/0547/2005; B.K. Industries and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0324/1993; Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0445/1973; State of Kerala and Ors. v. Maharashtra Distilleries Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0364/2005; Hotel Balaji and Ors. v. State of A.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0439/1986; Pearlite Liners (P) Ltd. v. Manorama Sirsi MANU/SC/0016/2004; C.M. Joseph and Ors. v. State of Kerala and Ors. ; Solomon Antony and Ors. v. State of Kerala and Ors. MANU/SC/0123/2001; Hindustan Times and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Anr. MANU/SC/0903/2002; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly MANU/SC/0439/1986; Delhi Transport Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress MANU/SC/0031/1991
Authorities Referred:
G.P. Singh's Principles of Statutory Interpretation, Tenth Edition; Craies on Statute Law, 7th edition
Prior History:
From the Final Judgment dated 22.3.2005 of the Kerala High Court in W.P. (C) No. 26918 of 2004
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  11

Mentioned
  10

*Case Note:
Abkari Shops Disposal Rules, 2002 (Kerala Rules)--Rules 4(2) and 9(10)(b)--Rules are ultra vires the Abkari Act.

The Appellants challenge the validity of Rules 4(2) and 9(10)(b) of the Kerala Abkari Shops Disposal Rules as per which arrack workers remaining unemployed consequent to abolition of arrack shops are to be absorbed in accordance with seniority, as may be decided by the Government. The Kerala High Court upheld the validity of the Rules. Being aggrieved, the Appellants approached the Apex Court. Allowing the Appeals;

Held:

The High Court, furthermore, in our opinion, is not correct in tracing the legislative power of the State to Entries 23 and 24 of the List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. The legislative field contained in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India provides for field of plenary power of the Legislature but what a Legislature can do evidently, a delegatee may not, unless other-wise provided for in the statute itself. When an employer gives employment to a person, a contract of employment is entered into. The right of the citizens to enter into any contract, unless it is expressly prohibited by law or is opposed to public policy, cannot be restricted. Such a power to enter into a contract is within the realm of the Indian Contract Act. So long as the contract of employment in a particular trade is not prohibited either in terms of the statutory or constitutional scheme, the State's intervention would be unwarranted unless there exists a statutory interdict. Even to what extent such a legislative power can be exercised would be the subject-matter of debate but in a case of this nature there cannot be any doubt that the impugned rules are also contrary to the provisions of the Indian Contract Act as also the Specific Relief Act, 1963. Furthermore, a person may not have any fundamental right to trade or do business in liquor, but the person's right to grant employment or seek employment, when a business is carried on in terms of the provisions of the licence, is not regulated. The State while parting with its exclusive privilege cannot take recourse to the said doctrine having regard to the equity clause enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The State must in its dealings must act fairly and reasonably. The bargaining power of the State does not entitle it to impose any condition it desires.
Case Category:
STATE EXCISE-TRADING IN LIQUOR-PRIVILEGES, LICENCES-DISTILLERIES BREWERIES
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J
1. Leave granted.
2. Whether Rules 4(2) and 9(10)(b) of the Kerala Abkari Shops Disposal Rules, 2002 (for short "the Rules") are ultra vires the Abkari Act (for short "the Act") is the question involved in these appeals which arise out of a judgment and order dated 22.3.2005 passed by a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court at Ernakulam in Writ Appeal Nos. 676, 677, 680, 722 of 2004 and Writ Petition (C) Nos. 17138 of 2003 and 26918, 27105 and 37762 of 2004 whereby and whereunder the High Court following its earlier decision in Anil Kumar v. State of Kerala MANU/KE/0372/2004 : 2005(1)KLT130 dismissed the appeals and the writ petitions. The Appellant herein is a federation of trade unions of toddy tappers and workers in toddy shops situate in the State of Kerala.
3. The Abkari Act was enacted by the Maharaja of Cochin in the year 1902. It is a pre-constitutional statute. It is applicable to the entire State of Kerala. The provisions of the said Act seek to control and regulate various categories of intoxicating liquor and intoxicating drugs including arrack, toddy, Indian Made Foreign Liquor (IMFL), country liquor and other types of foreign liquor. On or about 1.4.1996, the State of Kerala banned the sale of arrack. A policy decision admittedly was taken by the Labour and Rehabilitation Department of the State of Kerala that the workers who had been engaged in manufacture, import, export, transport, sale and possession of arrack should be rehabilitated. The State of Kerala paid compensation at the rate of Rs. 30,000/- per worker. The said workers were also paid benefits under the Abkari Workers Welfare Fund Board Act. It is not in dispute that a Welfare Board has also been constituted for the workers working in the toddy shops.
4. The expressions "Arrack" and "toddy" have been defined in Sections 3(6A) and 3(8) of the Act as under:
3(6A) "Arrack" means any potable liquor other than Toddy, Beer, Spirits of Wine, Wine Indian made spirit, foreign liquor and any medicinal preparation containing alcohol manufactured according to a formula prescribed in a pharmacopoeia approved by the Government of India or the Government of Kerala, or manufactured according to a formula approved by the Government of Kerala in respect of patent and proprietary preparations or approved as a bona fide medicinal preparation by the Expert Committee approved under Section 68A of the Act.
3(8) "Toddy" means fermented or unfermented juice drawn from a coconut, palmyra, date, or any other kind of palm tree;
5. Section 8 of the Act dealing with trade in Arrack was amended by Act No. 16 of 1997 which came into force from 3.6.1997. The trade was banned. Sections 18A, 24(c), 24(d) and 29(1), which are relevant for our purpose, read as under:
18A. Grant of exclusive or other privilege of manufacture etc on payment of rentals.
(1) It shall be lawful for the Government to grant to any person or persons, on such conditions and for such period as they may deem fit, the exclusive or other privilege -
(i) of manufacturing or supplying by wholesale; or
(ii) of selling by retail; or
(iii) of manufacturing or supplying by wholesale and selling by retail any liquor or intoxicating drugs within any local area on his or their payment to the Government of an amount as rental in consideration of the grant of such privilege. The amount of rental may be settled by auction, negotiation or by any other method as may be determined by the Government, from time to time, and may be collected to the exclusion of, or in addition, to the duty or tax leviable Under Sections 17 and 18.
(2) No grantee of any privilege under Sub-section (1) shall exercise the same until he has received a licence in that behalf from the Commissioner.
(3) In such cases, if the Government shall by notification so direct, the provisions of Section 12 relating to toddy and toddy producing trees shall not apply.
24. Forms and conditions of licenses, etc. - Every license or permit granted under this Act shall be granted -
(a) ***
(b) ***
(c) subject to such restrictions and on such conditions; and
(d) shall be in such form and contain particulars - as the Government may direct either generally, or in any particular instance in this behalf.
29. Power to make rules - (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, either prospectively or retrospectively, make rules for the purposes of this Act.
6. In exercise of the said power, the Rules were framed. After a lapse of about six years, the State inserted the impugned Rules, inter alia directing that one arrack worker each must be employed in all toddy shops in the following terms:
4(2) The shops so notified under sub-rule (1) above shall be such shops as are retained after abolition of certain existing shops. Grantees of privilege of such retained shops shall undertake to engage the existing workers and such eligible workers of the abolished shops who were registered with the Toddy Workers Welfare Fund Board as on 31-3-2000 and as are redeployed to their shops. Grantee of privilege shall also undertake to engage on Arrack worker of the abolished Arrack Shops of the State as would be allotted to his shop for rehabilitation, on the basis of district level seniority.
9(10) In order to ensure that the employment of workers of abolished Toddy and Arrack Shops are protected, the licensees shall abide by the following conditions also:
(a) *** ***
(b) One Arrack Worker who has been remaining unemployed since the abolition of Arrack Shops with effect from 1st April 1996 shall be absorbed in the shop as may be decided by Government by observing the District level seniority of such Arrack Workers.
7. The validity of the said Rules was questioned both by the holders of licences as also by the toddy workers. The employees of the toddy shops are traditional workers. A learned Single Judge of the High Court upheld the validity of the Rules inter alia holding:
(i) in view of Section 18A of the Act, as control of liquor in trade is within the exclusive domain of the State and as terms and conditions can be prescribed for granting a licence, the impugned rules were validly made.
(ii) Although, Section 29(2) does not contain any provision enabling the State to make such a provision, the same would, however, come within the purview of Sub-section (1) thereof.
(iii) Source of power of the State to frame such rules can be traced to Entries 23 and 24 of List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India.
8. The Division Bench of the said High Court upheld the said conclusions of the learned Single Judge. Only the toddy workers are in appeal before us. Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellants would submit:
(i) The State in making the aforementioned rules transgressed its power of delegated legislation as the Act does not contain any provision as regards adoption of welfare measures to be taken by the State.
(ii) The social purpose for which the said rules were made is governed by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
(iii) As the matter relating to the terms and conditions of employment of workmen is covered by the said parliamentary legislation, the State had no competence whatsoever to make such a rule.
(iv) The power under Sub-section (1) of Section 29 of the Act could be resorted to only for the purpose of giving effect to the Act and not for a purpose de'hors the same.
(v) The entries contained in the three lists of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India enumerate only the legislative field, specifying the sources of legislation by the Parliament and the State legislatures and in terms thereof, the State has no power to make the concerned rule.
(vi) It may be true that the State has the exclusive privilege of carrying on business in liquor but the same would not mean that while parting with the said privilege the State can impose any unreasonable restriction which would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
9. Mr. T.L.V. Iyer, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the State, on the other hand, would contend that:
(i) imposition of such a condition is within the domain of the State in terms of Sections 18A, 24(c), 24(d) and 29 of the Act inasmuch as while granting a licence for sale of toddy, the State merely parts with a privilege which exclusively vested in it and in that view of the matter if in terms of the policy decision of the State, arrack workers were to be rehabilitated, it could direct employment of unemployed arrack workers and, thus, there was absolutely no reason as to why such a condition cannot be imposed while parting with the privilege by the State in terms of Section 18A of the Act which enables the State to impose such conditions or restrictions as it may deem fit for the purpose of grant of a licence to sell intoxicating liquor.
(ii) As arrack and toddy both come within the purview of the Act, the State is entitled to exercise its control there over which in turn would mean that a provision enabling the arrack workers, thrown out of employment, to be employed in toddy shops has a reasonable nexus with the purposes of the Act and such a provision cannot be said to be extraneous to the provisions of the Act and would come within the purview of Sub-section (1) of Section 29 thereof.
(iii) The Rules which are impugned in these appeals enable the State to direct employment of toddy workers also who are displaced by the relocation of the toddy shops or reduction in their number and as such the workers cannot successfully question the validity of the Rules.
(iv) The right of the State to impose conditions is recognised by Sections 18A, 24(c) and (d) and in that view of the matter while considering the validity of the Rules made in terms of Sub-section (1) of Section 29 of the Act, the jurisdiction of this Court should not be confined only to looking at the object and purport of the Act as contended by the Appellants herein but also look to the purposes which are sub-served thereby.
(v) Section 69 of the Act also assumes importance in this context and confers a statutory flavour on the rules made under the Act and rules validly made in terms thereof become a part of the Act itself.
10. Mr. Romy Chacko, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Intervener would supplement the submissions of Mr. Iyer contending that the purpose of the Act must be found out from the various provisions of the Act and not from Section 18A of the Act or Section 24 alone. The learned Counsel would contend that while parting with the privilege, the State can impose any condition and it is for the licensee to take it or leave it. The learned Counsel would further submit that as dealing in liquor is rest-extra commercium, as has been held by this Court in Har Shankar and Ors. v. Dy. Excise and Taxation Commr. and Ors. MANU/SC/0321/1975 : [1975]3SCR254 , the licensee could not have contended that the condition imposed for grant of licence was onerous.
11. Drawing our attention to sub-rule (38) of Rule 7, it was urged that the licensees are bound by all the rules which have either been passed under the Act or which may thereafter be made there under or under any law relating to Abkari Revenue which may be made in future and, thus, the power conferred upon the State must be held to be of wide amplitude.
12. The Act was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to the import, export, transport, manufacture, sale and possession of intoxicating liquor and/ or intoxicating drugs in the State of Kerala. While framing the Rules for the purposes of the Act, the legislative policy cannot be abridged. The Rules must be framed to carry out the purposes of the Act. By reason of Section 8 of the Act, trade in arrack was prohibited as far back as in the year 1996. By reason of the impugned Rules, the State has not laid down the terms and conditions for employment of a worker. The Act does not contain any provision therefore. Under the common law as also under the provisions of the Specific Relief Act, an employer is entitled to employ any person he likes. It is well-settled that no person can be thrust upon an unwilling employer except in accordance with the provisions of a special statute operating in the field. Such a provision cannot be made by the State in exercise of its power under delegated legislation unless the same is expressly conferred by the statute.
13. A rule is not only required to be made in conformity with the provisions of the Act whereunder it is made, but the same must be in conformity with the provisions of any other Act, as a subordinate legislation cannot be violative of any plenary legislation made by the Parliament or the State Legislature. The State by enacting Section 8 of the Act prohibited sale of arrack. Once such a right to bring about prohibition, having regard to the principles contained in Article 47 of the Constitution of India is exercised, no trade being in existence, the question of exercise of any control would not arise. Such a power in view of Section 8 of the Act must be held to be confined only to carrying out the provisions thereof meaning thereby, no person can be allowed to deal in arrack and in the event, any person is found to be dealing therewith, to take appropriate penal action in respect thereof as provided.
14 Rules 4(2) and 9(10)(b) in the Rules were introduced six years after the trade in arrack was completely prohibited. In the aforementioned backdrop of events, the question as regard applicability of the provisions of Sections 18A, 24(c) and (d) of the Act is required to be construed. Section 18A of the Act recognises the common law right of the State to part with the privilege. The State's exclusive privilege of supply or sale of liquor is also not in question. But, we may notice that Section 18A is an enabling provision. It was enacted evidently having regard to Article 47 of the Constitution of India. The State while parting with its exclusive privilege or a part thereof, may impose such conditions but once such terms and conditions are laid down by reason of a statute, the same cannot be deviated from.
14.1 In Har Shankar (supra) whereupon Mr. Chacko placed reliance, it was stated:
5. Auctions for granting the right to sell country liquor for the year 1968-69 were initially held in various districts of Punjab on or about March 8, 1968 in pursuance of conditions of auction framed on February 19, 1968. Those auctions became ineffective by reason of a judgment dated March 12, 1968 of a Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in MANU/SC/0571/1971 : [1971]3SCR871 (Jage Ram v. State of Haryana). Following an earlier judgment in Bhajan Lal v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0384/1970 : [1971]2SCR497 the High Court took the view that the licence fee realised through the medium of auctions was really in the nature of "still-head duty" and that the licensees could not be called upon by the Government to pay still-head duty on the liquor quota which, under the terms of auctions, they were bound to lift but which in fact was not lifted by them.
The said decision has no application to the fact of the present case, as therein this Court was concerned with a different question. It is, furthermore, not in dispute that Article 14 of the Constitution of India would be attracted even in the matter of trade in liquor.
14.2 In State of M.P. and Ors. v. Nandlal Jaiswal and Ors. MANU/SC/0034/1986 : [1987]1SCR1 , this Court opined:
...The State under its regulatory power has the power to prohibit absolutely every form of activity in relation to intoxicants - its manufacture, storage, export, import, sale and possession. No one can claim as against the State the right to carry on trade or business in liquor and the State cannot be compelled to part with its exclusive right or privilege of manufacturing and selling liquor. But when the State decides to grant such right or privilege to others the State cannot escape the rigour of Article 14. It cannot act arbitrarily or at its sweet will. It must comply with the equality clause while granting the exclusive right or privilege of manufacturing or selling liquor. It is, therefore, not possible to uphold the contention of the State Government and Respondents 5 to 11 that Article 14 can have no application in a case where the licence to manufacture or sell liquor is being granted by the State Government. The State cannot ride roughshod over the requirement of that article.