MANU/SC/0007/1995
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petn. No. 239 of 1993
Decided On: 09.09.1994
Appellants:Khedat Mazdoor Chetna Sangath
Vs.
Respondent: State of M.P. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
M.N. Venkatachaliah, CJI. and S. Mohan, J.
Subject: Criminal
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 21
Disposition:
In Favour of Accused
Cases Referred:
Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Administration, MANU/SC/0084/1980; Sunil Gupta v. State of M.P., MANU/SC/0661/1990
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  2

Case Note:
Labor and Industrial - Trade union - Atrocities on members - Present petition is filed with prayers to restrain respondent from harassing and arresting members of petitioner organization and to order an enquiry into atrocities committed by respondents on said members - Whether petitioner has made out a case for grant of relief as prayed - Held, magistracy requires to be sensitized to the values of human dignity and to restraint on power - When it allows an inhuman conduct on part of police, it exhibits both indifference and insensitiveness to human dignity - It also violates constitutional rights of citizens - There could be no worse lapse on part of judiciary which is sentinel of these great liberties - Investigation in present case is handed over to CBI - Petition allowed. [44]
ORDER
S. Mohan, J.
1. The petitioner Khedat Mazdoor Chetna Sangath is a registered Trade Union of Bhil, Bhilala, Mankar and Nasik tribals of Alirajpur Tehsir in Jhabua District of Madhya Pradesh. It was started in October 1982. The object was to protest against and prevent the exploitation of the tribals. The construction of Sardar Sarovar Dam on the river Narmada is again another issue for which the petitioner's association has been fighting for.
2. In the high hills of the Vindhya range, south of Jhabua District, massive deforestation has taken place. That has resulted in degradation and the productivity has reduced/So much so, Jhabua has become chronically drought prone area. This has led to large scale crime, the people being poor wanted to make both ends meet.
3. The petitioner's association has fought or access to forest resources which has been denied to them. Today, equally it has taken a crusade against corruption. The Sangath has strengthened the traditional tribals custom of community resolution of disputes through Nyaya Panchayats, corrupt police officials have been publicly arraigned, departmental enquiries have been instituted on complaints lodged; cases have also been lodged; payment of minimum wages and eight hours working for a day have been secured. Further, the petitioner's association demands environmental regeneration; social ameliorative measures like educating them and promoting their culture. Encouragement of knowledge regarding herbal medicines, sponsoring Grain Banks and Co-operative Marketing have been undertaken in a large scale. Such measures have yielded good results.
4. The Sangath is wedded to the adoption of peaceful and constitutional means of mobilisation and protest and constructive developmental work with the aim of building up a strong tribal identity in control both the economy and politics at the local level and capable of contributing creatively to the worldwide struggle for a more sustainable and equal developmental regime. Recently, there have been acts of repressions and police violence and atrocities perpetrated on the members of the petitioner's association and local adivasis on 30.10.1992. The Jhabua Collector R.S. Julania, respondent No. 2 held a meeting in Kakrana concerning submergence of zone villages. The Collector warned the people that if they persisted in their resistance, the combined might of the State - lathi, gun and pen would be used against them. When the meeting ended, seven activities of Sangath were arrested. Of these, six were brutally beaten in the Alirajpur police station by the S.D.M. Vinod Kumar. On being present d before the Magistrate, when a demand was made for medical examination and the injuries being noted, that was denied under police pressure.
5. After the meeting the police started arresting them one by one. This was on the basis of a false FIR registered at police station Sondva. On 12.10.1992 the police officials brutally beat up the members of the Petitioner Organisation in police custody.
6. On 17th November 1992 the Petitioner Khemla Aujanharia was arrested by the Alirajpur police who was handcuffed and paraded throughout the town by the police. Thereafter the police registered another FIR for effecting the arrest with regard to a rally on 10th November 1992 in which it was alleged that Khemla was involved. This is false since he was in Kerala on 15th October, 1992 when they alleged incidents are stated to have taken place. In evidence of this the petitioner has annexed a letter of the Executive Director of SHRUTI evidencing Khemla's participation in Kerala between 12th and 17th October 1992. Similar arrests of innocent people have been taking place. For trivial incidents they have been registering FIRs. Mot of these are false FIRs. Falsity of these FIRs is evident from the fact that FIR 11 of 1993 regarding the incidents of 22nd January had been registered at the instance of Prem Lal Nigam, an official of Narmada Development Authority.
7. On 2nd February, 9 activists who had gone to Indore to hold the Press Conference for countering the false charges made by the Collector were arrested. They were brought to Alirajpur where they were beaten in police custody. They were then handcuffed and paraded in the streets of Alirajpur. Concerning this Rahul N Ram and Ravi made a written complaint on 8.2.1993 to the Magistrate about the harassment and torture in police custody. In all, 28 people have been arrested between 31st January and 23rd February. They were charged for attempted murder. On 29th January 1993 Rahul N Ram was supposed to have attacked the police when he was in Baroda. The acts of violence, looting and destruction committed by the police on the villagers of Anjanwada between 29th January to 2nd February 1993 were reported extensively by the local as well as notional press. A team of 3 highly respected persons investigated into it and submitted a report on 12th February 1993 that there was large scale brutal violence and terror perpetrated by the police on the Adivasis and activists of the petitioner organisation.
8. Besides the police terrorising the Adivasis and members of the Petitioner Organisation, the Government of Madhya Pradesh has also launched a systematic campaign to malign the petitioner organisation by issuing false press releases.
9. All the above facts and circumstances leave no manner of doubt that the local administration including the Collector of the Jhabua and the S.P. of police are determined to crush the petitioner organisation by resorting to all kind of illegal arrests, intimidation, violence, torture in police custody and even gone to the extent of looting and wantonly destroying the property of the local Adivasi villagers.
10. The petitioner organisation states that all these have been done under instructions of the Collector of Jhabua who had developed an inexplicable hostility and animosity against the members of the Petitioner Organisation. In fact he personally participated in be labouring of Shri Khemla. These acts are not only violative of the fundamental rights of the members of the Petitioner Organisation but also of the local Adivasis. If such acts are allowed unchecked and undeterred, it will lead to a complete repression of all voluntary and social organisations which are considered to be a hindrance to a corrupt, brutal and exploitative administration. This will reduce the country to a police state. It is, therefore, absolutely essential in the interest of justice, human dignity and democracy that this Court must intervene; order an investigation determine the correct facts and take strongest possible action against the respondents who are responsible for these atrocities.