MANU/SC/0951/2003
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 5665 and 5666 of 2002
Decided On: 20.11.2003
Appellants:Liverpool and London S.P. and I Asson. Ltd.
Vs.
Respondent:M.V. Sea Success I and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
V.N. Khare, C.J. and S.B. Sinha, J.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Prashant S. Pratap, Siddhartha Dave, Vibha Datta Makhija, Zarir P. Bharucha, Reetu Sharma, R.N. Karanjawala, Manik Karanjawala, Avantika Keswani, R.K. Aggarwal, Sanjay Dua, Arun Kumar Sinha and Rakesh Singh, Advs. for Appearing parties
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Admiralty Court Act, 1861 - Section 5
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 104; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 117; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 44-A, Colonial Courts Of Admiralty (india) Act, 1891[repealed] - Section 2; Colonial Courts Of Admiralty Act, 1890 [repealed] - Section 2; Constitution Of India - Article 1, Constitution Of India - Article 1(k), Constitution Of India - Article 13, Constitution Of India - Article 13(1), Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 7; Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 108; Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 - Section 17-B, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 54; Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 - Section 352N; Representation Of The People Act, 1951 - Section 116-A, Representation Of The People Act, 1951 - Section 116A, Representation Of The People Act, 1951 - Section 86, Representation Of The People Act, 1951 - Section 98, Representation Of The People Act, 1951 - Section 98(a)
Cases Referred:
Queen v. Judge of the City of London Court, 1891 1 QB 273; The Beldis, 1936 51; Webster v. Seekamp, 1821 43 & Ald 352; Heinrich Bjorn, 1883 8 P.D. 151; The Andre Theodore, 10 Aspinall 94; Stokes v. The Conference, 1887 (8) NSWR 10; The River Rima, 1988 2 L Rep 193, [1987] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 106; The Emerald Transporter, 1985 2 SALR 152; The Golden Petroleum, 1994 1 SLR 92; The Aifanourious, 1980 2 L Reps. 403; Gatoil International Inc. v. Arwkright Boston Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Co. and Ors.; The Sandrina, 1985 (1) All ER 129; M.V. Elisabeth, MANU/SC/0685/1993; Equilease Corporation v. M.V. Sampson, 793 F.2d 598; M.V. Al Quamar v. Tsavliris Salvage (International) Ltd. and Ors., MANU/SC/0514/2000; Gould v. Cornhill Insurance Co. Ltd., 1 DLR 4th Ed. 183; The Riga, (1869) L.R. 3 A&E 516; The Edinburgh Castle, (1999) Vol. 2 Lloyd's Law Reports 362; The Kommunar, [1997] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 1; The Fairport (No. 5), [1967] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 162; The Equator, (1921) 9 L1.L.R6. 1; Nore Challenger and Nore Commander, (2001) Vol. 2 Lloyd's Law Reports 103; Kapila Hingorani v. State of Bihar, MANU/SC/0403/2003; Missouri v. Holland, 252 US 416; Jagdish Saran and Ors. v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0067/1980; John Vallamattom and Anr. v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0480/2003; Indian Handicrafts Emporium and Ors. v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0640/2003; Motor General Traders and Anr. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors., MANU/SC/0293/1983; Rattan Arya and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr., MANU/SC/0550/1986; Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. and Ors. v. State of U.P. and Ors., MANU/SC/0595/1989; New Zealand case, (1980) 1 NZLR 104 (NZSC); Yuri Maru, 1927 AC 906, 43 TLR 698; National Insurance Co. Ltd., Chandigarh v. Nicolletta Rohtagi and Ors., MANU/SC/0810/2002; Victoria Machinery Depot Co. Ltd. v. The 'Canada' and the 'Triumph', (1913) 15 Ex.C.R. 136, 14 D.L.R. 318; Laming v. Seater; The Heather Bell and Law Guarantee and Trust Society v. Russian Bank; Marazura Navegacion S.A. and Ors. v. Oceanus Mutual_Underwriting Association (Bermuda) Ltd._and_John Laing (Management) Ltd., [1977] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 283; ABDIN DAVER, [1984] A.C. 398; Grow v. Steel Gas Screw Lorrains K, 310 F.2d 547 (6th Cir. 1962); In Re: Petition of Insurance Co. of Pennsylvanis, 22. F.109, N.D.N.Y. 1884; Insurance Co. of Pennsylvania v. The Proceeds of the Sale of the Barge Waubauschene, 24 F. 559, C.C.N.D.N.Y.1885; Trident Marine Managers Inc. v. Serial No. CEBRF 0661586, 1988 A.M.C. 763; The Justices of the Peace for Calcutta v. Oriental Gas Company, 1872 VIII Ben. LR 433; Prahladrai Agarwalla v. Shri Renuka Pal, MANU/WB/0066/1982; Shah Babulal Khimji v. Jayaben Kania, MANU/SC/0036/1981; Subal Paul v. Malina Paul and Anr., MANU/SC/0149/2003; Subal Paul v. Malina Paul and Anr., MANU/SC/0149/2003; Tanusree Art Printers and Anr. v. Rabindra Nath Pal, [MANU/WB/0195/2000; Prataprai N. Kothari v. John Braganza, MANU/SC/0316/1999; Sharda Devi v. State of Bihar, MANU/SC/0184/2002; Merchants of Traders (P) Ltd. v. Sarmon Pvt. Ltd., MANU/WB/0157/1997; Lea Badin v. Upendra Mohan Roy, MANU/WB/0167/1934; Chittaranjan Mondal v. Sankar Prosad Sahani, MANU/WB/0101/1972; Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi, MANU/SC/0284/1986; Dhartipakar Aggarwal v. Rajiv Gandhi, MANU/SC/0378/1987; K. Kamaraja Nadar v. Kunju Thevar, MANU/SC/0096/1958; Samar Singh v. Kedar Nath, MANU/SC/0386/1987; Dipak Chandra Ruhidas v. Chandan Kumar Sarkar, MANU/SC/0560/2003; Gulf, C. & S.F. Ry. Co. v. Smit, Okl., 270 P.2d 629; Pulaski v. State, 23 Wis. 2d 138, 126 N.W. 2d 625; Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd. v. Union of India and Anr., MANU/SC/0053/2001; William v. Wilcox, (1838) 8 Ad. & EL 331; Mohan Rawale v. Damodar Tatyaba, and Ors., MANU/SC/0637/1994; D. Ramachandran v. R.V. Janakiraman and Ors., MANU/SC/0154/1999; Punit Rai v. Dinesh Chaudhary, MANU/SC/0608/2003; Balwan Singh v. Lakshmi Nrain and Ors., MANU/SC/0192/1960; Vijay Pratap Singh v. Dukh Haran Nath Singh, MANU/SC/0394/1962; The Aventicum, [1978] 1 Lloyd's L.R.; Saloman v. Saloman & Co., 1897 A.C. 22; The Andrea Ursula, [1971] 1 Lloyd's L.R. 145
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.11.2001 of the Bombay High Court in A. No. 226/2001 in Notice of Motion No. 2455/2000 in Admiralty Suit No. 32 of 2000 (MANU/MH/0842/2001)
Authorities Referred:
American Jurisprudence 2d, at page 478;  Modern Admiralty Law by Aleka Mandaraka-Sheppard at page 642; Shipping Law by Simon Baughen, Second Edition ; Principles of Maritime Law by Susan Hodges and Christopher Hill at page 364; Black's Law Dictionary at page 1348; Cheshire and North's Private International Law, 12th Edition
Citing Reference:

Affirmed
  3

Dissented
  1

Mentioned
  3

Relied On
  35

Case Note:
Civil - civil Procedure Code - Section 44A, 104, 117, Order 7 Rule 11, 11A, 14, Order 37, Order 43 Rule 1, Order 49 Rule 3 - Appellant is an association of ship owners which offers insurance cover in respect of the vessels entered with it for diverse third party risk - No vessel operates without a protection and indemnity cover and has been made compulsory for a ship to have the same to enter the major ports in India - Respondents entered into contract with the appellant but have not paid the insurance premium for the various risk cover - Necessity of this covers are commercial expediency - Each member of the club is under a duty to refund the damage suffered by any one of them and pay on mutual basis each other's claims - Unpaid insurance premium of the club would come within the purview of necessaries - Unpaid insurance premium being a maritime claim would be enforceable in India - The order of the single judge determines the entitlement of the club to receive the unpaid insurance claim and imposes an obligation onto the respondent to pay the same and the order can only be a judgment and therefore Letters Patent Appeal was maintainable - Matter to High Court to decide the preliminary issue and to dispose off the matter as expeditiously as possible
Case Category:
ADMIRALITY AND MARITIME LAWS
Industry: Shipping
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
THE BACKGROUND FACT:
1. The appellant (Club) herein is an association incorporated under the laws of the United Kingdom. It is a mutual association of ship owners. It offers insurance cover in respect of the vessels entered with it for diverse third party risks associated with the operation and trading of vessels. According to the appellant, no vessel operates without a Protection & Indemnity (P&I) cover and the same has been made compulsory to allow a ship to enter major ports in India.
2. 'Sea Ranger' and 'Sea Glory' are the sister vessels of the 1st respondent vessel and they are allegedly owned by the 2nd respondent. The first two vessels entered into a contract with the appellant's association for the years 1998-1999 and 1999-2000 but they have not paid the unpaid insurance premium due and payable by the 2nd respondent for various P&I risks for which they had been insured. These unpaid insurance calls being "necessaries" was enforceable within the "admiralty jurisdiction" of the Bombay High Court.
3. For the arrest of the 1st respondent vessel which came to Mumbai Port within the territorial waters of India, a suit was filed by the club inter alia for the prayers : "(a) for a decree against the respondents in the sum of US$1,18,194.89 together with interest at the rate of 12% per annum, which was the unpaid insurance premium amount due to the club and payable by the 2nd respondent; and (b) for arrest of the 1st respondent vessel to secure the claim."
4. On an application for arrest of the 1st respondent vessel having been made, the 2nd respondent appeared and undertook to furnish security in respect of the appellant's claim and further gave an undertaking that until the security is furnished the said vessel will not leave the Port of Mumbai. However, thereafter S.S. Shipping Corporation Inc., Liberia claiming to be the registered owner of the 1st respondent furnished a bank-guarantee in relation to the appellant's claim in discharge of the undertaking of security given by the second respondent. The 1st respondent thereafter took out a Notice of Motion for rejection of the plaint purported to be under Order 7 Rule 11(a) of the Code of civil Procedure inter alia on the ground that the averments contained therein do not disclose a cause of action as the claim of unpaid insurance premium was not a "necessary" within the meaning of Section 5 of the Admiralty Courts Act, 1861. A learned Single Judge of the High Court after hearing the Notice of Motion by an order dated 1-2/2/2001 referred the said question to a Division Bench as it could not agree with a decision rendered by another learned Single Judge. However, on the other two grounds it discharged the Notice of Motion holding that the averments made in paragraphs 1 and 14 of the plaint inter alia to the effect that all the three ships are beneficially owned by the 2nd respondent disclose a cause of action.
5. An appeal there against was preferred by the respondent herein. The Division Bench took up the appeal preferred by the respondent herein as also the reference made by the learned Single Judge and passed a common judgment.
ISSUES :
6. The questions which arose for consideration before the High Court were:
(i) whether arrears of insurance premium due and payable to the appellant by the 2nd respondent would fall within the scope and ambit of Section 5 of the Admiralty Courts Act, 1861;
(ii) whether refusing to reject the plaint under Order 7 Rule 11(a) upon holding that the plaint discloses a cause of action is a 'judgment' within the meaning of Clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the Bombay High Court and was, thus, appealable; and
(iii)Whether the averments made in paragraphs 1 and 14 of the plaint disclose sufficient cause of action for maintaining a suit.
7. The Division Bench while answering the question No. 1 in favour of appellant, answered question Nos. 2 and 3 against it. Appeal No. 226 of 2001 has been filed by the 'club' whereas civil Appeal No. 5666 of 2002 has been filed by the 'vessel'.
Submissions :
8. Mr. Bharucha, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the "Vessel" would inter alia submit:
(i) The amount of arrears of insurance premium alleged to be due to the 1st respondent towards release calls is not a maritime claim entitling the Club to invoke the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court as such unpaid insurance money does not constitute 'necessaries' within the meaning of Section 5 of the Admiralty Courts Act, 1861.
(ii) Sufficiently direct and proximate connection between insurance and the vessel is a prerequisite for bringing an action in rem. Insurance is meant primarily as a means of indemnifying and protecting the vessel owner against the loss of his vessel and/or claims that that may arise as a result of damage or loss caused by the vessel. Although it may be a commercial necessity but the same would not come within the purview of the term 'necessaries' within the meaning of the provisions of the said Act. The provisions contained in the Admiralty Courts Act of 1840 and 1861, Section 22 of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act, 1925, the 1952 Brussels Arrest Convention as also the Administration of Justice Act, 1956 disclose one uniform feature that in order that a monetary claim qualifies for and is recognized as a maritime claim the same must be necessary for operation of the ship.
(iii)In United Kingdom, it has consistently been held for more than a century that unpaid insurance premium is not a "necessary" within the conventional meaning of the said term as understood in maritime law. The said view has been reiterated by the Courts of Australia, South Africa and Singapore. In support of the said contention, strong reliance has been placed on Queen v. Judge of the City of London Court 1891 1 QB 273, The Beldis 1936 P. 51, Webster v. Seekamp 1821 43 & Ald 352, Heinrich Bjorn 1883 8 P.D. 151, The Andre Theodore 10 Aspinall 94, Stokes v. The Conference 1887 (8) NSWR 10, The River Rima 1988 2 L Rep 193, a South African Court decision in The Emerald Transporter 1985 2 SALR 152 as also a decision of Singapore High Court in The Golden Petroleum 1994 1 SLR 92.
(iv) The expression "necessaries supplied to any ship" although has not statutorily been defined; over a long period of time, the same had attained a definite connotation, i.e., goods or services supplied to a specifically identified ship in order to successfully prosecute the voyage in question, and, thus, applying the said test unpaid insurance premium does not answer the said definition. The matter has furthermore to be looked at from the point of view of physical necessity and practicality and not from the viewpoint of prudence or sound economics.
(v) There are a large number of categories of insurance from hull and machinery insurance, to protection and indemnity (P&I) cover, through war risks, to freight demurrage and defence cover (FD&D), oil spill cover (TOVALOP), and strike cover etc and in that view of the matter if P&I should be held to be a necessary, others are not, the same would lead to an incongruous situation.
(vi) In view of the decision in The Aifanourious 1980 2 L Reps. 403 as also the decision rendered by the House of Lords in Gatoil International Inc. v. Arwkright Boston Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Co. and Ors. The Sandrina 1985 (1) All ER 129, holding that claim for unpaid insurance has never been recognized as maritime claim under any other head and the Courts of England expressly held the same to have been excluded as such under Article 1 of the Brussels Arrest Convention, 1952. Such a claim, thus, due to unpaid insurance premium would not be a maritime claim also under the head "disbursements made on account of a ship".
(vii) In the decision of this Court in M.V. Elisabeth MANU/SC/0685/1993 : [1992]1SCR1003 , it was merely held that the High Courts in India will have an extended jurisdiction under the Admiralty Courts Act, 1861 and the said principle cannot be further extended.
(viii) As the maritime jurisdiction of the High Courts in India was derived from the pre-independence statutes and as the High Courts of India exercise the same jurisdiction as that of the courts in England, it must necessarily be held that the interpretation of the word "necessaries" rendered by the English Courts and which has been followed by other courts except by the American Court should prevail.
9. Mr. Prashant S. Pratap, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Club, on the other hand, would submit that:
(i) "necessaries" are the things which a prudent owner would provide to enable a Ship to perform the functions wherefore she has been engaged and, thus, the provision of services would come within the definition of necessaries.
(ii) The term "necessaries" must be construed in a broad and liberal manner keeping in mind the ever changing requirements of a ship to be able to trade in commerce.
(iii) Contemporary maritime statutes in England do not use the term "necessaries" but the American Federal Maritime Liens Act does and, thus, decision rendered by the American Courts that insurance is a "necessary" should be held to be correct. (Equilease Corporation v. M.V. Sampson 793 F.2d 598- U.S. Court of Appeals).
(iv) A valid P&I insurance cover is necessary for a ship to call at major ports in India and consequently so far as India is concerned, it is a necessity having regard to the fact that Mumbai Port, JNPT and Kolkata Port have issued a statutory direction in this behalf.
(v) The domestic legislation in India also provide for a compulsory insurance. Reference in this connection has been placed on the Inland Vessels Act, 1917 (as amended in the year 1977), the Merchant Shipping Act, 1956 (as amended in 1983) and Multimodal Transportation of Goods Act, 1993 (as amended in 2000) and in that view of the matter the pedantic and regressive view should be discouraged specially in the light of the judgment of this Court in M.V. Elisabeth (supra).
(vi) By reason of the 1999 Arrest Convention inter alia unpaid insurance calls had been added and in absence of any codification and maritime claim by a statute in India the same should be taken into consideration for determination of the jurisdiction of the High Court. Several countries such as Canada, South Africa, Australia, China and Korea have given the claim for unpaid insurance premium in respect of a ship, the status of a maritime claim.
(vii) Flexibilities being the virtue of law court, the High Court has rightly held that the marine premium would come within the purview of the term "necessaries" having regard to the global change and outlook in trade and commerce. Reliance in this connection has been placed on M.V. Al Quamar v. Tsavliris Salvage (International) Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0514/2000 : AIR2000SC2826 .
STATUTORY PROVISIONS :
10. The relevant provisions of Admiralty Court Act, 1840 are as follows:
"3. WHENEVER A VESSEL SHALL BE ARRESTED, ETC., COURT TO HAVE JURISDICTION OVER CLAIMS OF MORTGAGEES: Whenever any ship or vessel shall be under arrest by process issuing from the said High Court of Admiralty, or the proceeds of any ship or vessel having been so arrested shall have been brought into and be in the registry of the said court, in either such case the said court shall have full jurisdiction to take cognizance of all claims and causes of action of any person in respect of any mortgage of such ship or vessel, and to decide any suit instituted by any such person in respect of any such claims or causes of action respectively.
4. COURT TO DECIDE QUESTIONS OF TITLE, ETC.: The said Court of Admiralty shall have jurisdiction to decide all questions as to the title to or ownership of any ship, or vessel, or the proceeds thereof remaining in the registry, arising in any cause of possession, salvage, damage, wages or bottomry, which shall be instituted in the said court after the passing of this Act.
6. THE COURT IN CERTAIN CASES MAY ADJUDICATE, ETC.: The High Court of Admiralty shall have jurisdiction to decide all claims and demands whatsoever in the nature of salvage for services rendered to or damage received by any ship or sea-going vessel or in the nature of towage, or for necessaries supplied to any foreign ship or seagoing vessel, and to enforce the payment thereof, whether such ship or vessel may have been within the body of a country, or upon the high seas, at the time when the services were rendered or damage received, or necessaries furnished, in respect of which such claim is made.
11. The relevant provisions of Admiralty Court Act, 1861 are as under:
"4. AS TO CLAIMS FOR BUILDING, EQUIPPING, OR REPAIRING OF SHIPS: The High Court of Admiralty shall have jurisdiction over any claim for the building, equipping, or repairing of any ship, if at the time of the institution of the cause the ship or the proceeds thereof are under arrest of the court.
5. AS TO CLAIMS FOR NECESSARIES: The High Court, of Admiralty shall have jurisdiction over any claim for necessaries supplied to any ship elsewhere than in the port to which the ship belongs, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that at the time of the institution of the cause any owner or part owner of the ship is domiciled in England or Wales: Provided always, that if in any such cause the plaintiff do not recover twenty pounds, he shall not be entitled to.
6. AS TO CLAIMS FOR DAMAGE TO CARGO IMPORTED: The High Court of Admiralty shall have jurisdiction over any claim by the owner or consignee or assignee of any bill of lading of any goods carried into any port in England or Wales in any ship, for damage done to the goods or any part thereof by the negligence or misconduct of or for any breach of duty or breach of contract on the part of the owner, master, or crew of the ship, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that at the time of the institution of the cause any owner' or part owner of the ship is domiciled in England or Wales: Provided always, that if any such cause the plaintiff do not recover twenty pounds, he shall not be entitled to any costs, charges, or expenses incurred by him therein, unless the judge shall certify that the cause was a fit one to be tried in the said court.
8. HIGH COURT OF ADMRILATY TO DECIDE QUESTIONS AS TO OWNERSHIP, ETC. OF SHIPS: The High Court of Admiralty shall have jurisdiction to decide all questions arising between the co-owners, or any of them, touching the ownership, possession, employment, and earnings of any ship registered at any port in England or Wales, or any share thereof, and may settle all accounts outstanding and unsettled between the parties in relation thereto, and may direct the said ship or any share thereof to be sold, and may make such order in the premises as to it shall seem fit.
12. Section 2 of Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890 reads thus:
"2. Colonial Courts of Admiralty. - (1) Every court of law in a British possession, which is for the time being declared in pursuance of this Act to be a Court of Admiralty, or which, if no such declaration is in force in the possession, has therein original unlimited civil jurisdiction, shall be a Court of Admiralty, with the jurisdiction in this Act mentioned, and may for the purpose of that jurisdiction, exercise all the powers which it possesses for the purpose of its other civil jurisdiction, and such Court in reference to the jurisdiction conferred by this Act is in this Act referred to as a Colonial Court of Admiralty....
(2) The jurisdiction of a Colonial Court of Admiralty shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be over the like places, persons, matters, and things, as the Admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court in England, whether existing by virtue of any statute or otherwise, and the Colonial Court of Admiralty may exercise such jurisdiction in like manner and to as full an extent as the High Court in England, and shall have the same regard as that Court to international law and the comity of nations.
13. Section 2 of The Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891 reads as under:
2. APPOINTMENT OF COLONIAL COURTS OF ADMIRALTY: The following Courts of unlimited civil jurisdiction are hereby declared to be Colonial Courts of Admiralty, namely:-
(1) the High Court of Judicature at Fort William in Bengal;
(2) the High Court of Judicature at Madras, and
(3) the High Court of Judicature at Bombay."
14. Section 22(1) of Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act, 1925 reads thus:
"22. ADMIRALTY JURISDICTION OF HIGH COURT: (1) The High Court shall, in relation to admiralty matters, have the following jurisdiction (in this Act referred to as "admiralty jurisdiction") that is to say -
(a)Jurisdiction to hear and determine any of the following questions or claims:
*****
(viii) Any claim by a seaman of a ship for wages earned by him on board the ship, whether due under a special contract or otherwise, and any claim by the master of a ship for wages earned by him on board the ship and for disbursements made by him on account of the ship;
(ix) Any claim in respect of a mortgage of any ship, being a mortgage duly registered in accordance with the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Acts, 1894 to 1923, or in respect of any mortgage of a ship which is, or the proceeds whereof are, under the arrest of the court;"
(x) Any claim for building, equipping or repairing, a ship, if at the time of the institution of the proceedings the ship is, or the proceeds thereof are, under the arrest of the court."
15. Articles 1(k) and 2 of the 1952 Brussels Convention are as under:
"(1) "Maritime Claim" means a claim arising out of one or more of the following:
(k) goods or materials wherever supplied to a ship for her operation or maintenance;
2. A ship flying the flag of one of the Contracting States may be arrested in the jurisdiction of any of the Contracting States in respect of any maritime claim, but in respect of no other claim; but nothing in this Convention shall be deemed to extend or restrict any right or powers vested in any Governments or their Departments, Public Authorities, or Dock or Harbour Authorities under their existing domestic laws or regulations to arrest, detain or otherwise prevent the sailing of vessels within their jurisdiction."
HISTORY OF JURISDICTION OF THE HIGH COURT :
16. The jurisdiction of the High Court of Admiralty in England used to be exercised in rem in such matters as from their very nature would give rise to a maritime lien - e.g. collision, salvage, bottomry. The jurisdiction of the High Court of Admiralty in England was, however, extended to cover matters in respect of which there was no maritime lien, i.e., necessaries supplied to a foreign ship. In terms of Section 6 of the Admiralty Act, 1861, the High Court of Admiralty was empowered to assume jurisdiction over foreign ships in respect of claims to cargo carried into any port in England or Wales. By reason of Judicature Act of 1873, the jurisdiction of the High Court of Justice resulted in a fusion: of admiralty law, common law and equity. The limit of the jurisdiction of the Admiralty court in terms of Section 6 of the 1861 Act was discarded by the Administration of Justice Act, 1920 and the jurisdiction of the High Court thereby was extended to (a) any claim arising out of an agreement relating to the use or hire of a ship; (b) any claim relating to the carriage of goods in any ship; and (c) any claim in tort in respect of goods carried in any ship.
17. The admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court was further consolidated by the Supreme Court of Judicature (Consolidation) Act, 1925 so as to include various matters such as any claim "for damage done by a ship", and claim 'arising out of an agreement relating to the use or hire of a ship'; or 'relating to the carriage of goods in a ship'; or "in tort in respect of goods carried in a ship".
18. The admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court was further widened by the Administration of Justice Act, 1956 so as to include not only the claims specified under Section 1(i) of Part I but also any other jurisdiction which either was vested in the High Court of Admiralty immediately before the date of commencement of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act, 1873 (i.e. November 1, 1875) or is conferred by or under an Act which came into operation on or after that date on the High Court as being a court with admiralty jurisdiction and any other jurisdiction connected with ships vested in the High Court apart from this section which is for the time being assigned by rules of court to the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division.
19. Sub-section (4) of Section 1 removed the restriction based on the ownership of the ship. By reason of Clauses (d)(g) and (h) of the said Section the jurisdiction in regard to question or claims specified under Section 1(i) included any claim for loss of or damage to goods carried in a ship, any claim arising out of any agreement relating to the carriage of goods in a ship or to the use or hire of a ship.
20. In the course of time the jurisdiction of the High Courts vested in all the divisions alike. The Indian High Courts after independence exercise the same jurisdiction.
NECESSARIES - AS A MARITIME CLAIM:
21. The concept "as to claims for necessaries" is specified under Section 5 of the Admiralty Court Act, 1861, which provides for the jurisdiction of High Court as regard "Necessaries supplied to any ship elsewhere than in the port to which the ship belongs, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that at the time of institution of the cause an owner or part owner of the ship is domiciled in England or Wales".
22. The term "necessaries" had not been defined in the Act of 1861. It was given a meaning by judicial pronouncements.
23. It stands accepted that having regard to the legislative and executive policy, England and Wales never considered the arrears of insurance premium as a 'necessary'. The Courts of England further maintained a distinction between a maritime claim and maritime lien. The decisions cited by Mr. Bharucha go to show that the English Courts proceeded on the premise that for the purpose of considering as to whether any necessary has been supplied to a ship or not must have a sufficient and direct connection with the operation of the ship. It held that unpaid insurance premium is not a maritime claim as it is not needed to keep it going. [See Queen v. Judge of the City of London Court (supra), Heinrich Bjorn (supra), The Andre Theodore (supra), The Aifanourious (supra). The English Courts, thus, refused to put a wide construction on that term.
24. A similar view was also adopted by an Australian High Court in Gould v. Cornhill Insurance Co. Ltd. [1 DLR 4th Ed. 183].
25. In The Riga (1869) L.R. 3 A&E 516, it is stated:
"The definition of the term "necessaries" given by Lord Tenterden in Webster v. Seekamp (4 B. & Ald. 352) adopted and applied in proceedings in Admiralty. Semble, there is no distinction between necessaries for the ship and necessaries for the voyage."
26. In The Edinburgh Castle [(1999) Vol. 2 Lloyd's Law Reports 362], it has been held:
"To address these concerns, Mr. Charkham helpfully invited my attention to a number of the authorities and to such discussion as there is on Section 20(2)(m) and its predecessors. Taking the matter very shortly, for present purposes, the following propositions emerge:
1. The words "in respect of" are wide words which should not be unduly restricted: The Kommunar, [1997] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 1.
2. Section 20(2)(m), which is derived from the equivalent provision in the Administration of Justice Act, 1956, contains a jurisdiction which is no narrower than the predecessor jurisdiction in respect of claims for "necessaries" : The Fairport (No. 5), [1967] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 162; The Kommunar, sup.
3. No distinction is to be drawn:
...between necessaries for the ship and necessaries for the voyage, and all things reasonably requisite for the particular adventure on which the ship is bound are comprised in this category. [Roscoe, The Admiralty Jurisdiction and Practice, 5th ed., at p. 203: The Riga (1872) L.R. 3 Ad. & Ecc. 516.
4. The jurisdiction extends to the provision of services: The Equator, (1921) 9 L1.L.R6. 1: The Fairport (No. 5), sup.
In the light of these propositions, I am satisfied that the plaintiffs bring their claims within Section 20(2)(m). Provisions for the passengers were "necessaries" for the particular adventure on which this passenger vessel was engaged. The provision of services is capable of coming within the subsection and does so here, given the nature of the services provided. I should mention that I was referred in addition to The River Rima, [1988] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 193 (H.L.) and [1987] 2 Lloyd's Rep. 106 (C.A.) but, as I understand it, nothing said there precludes my decision in favour of the plaintiffs on the facts of this case."
27. In Nore Challenger and Nore Commander [(2001) Vol. 2 Lloyd's Law Reports 103] the claim relating to supply of crew was held to be "necessary" stating:
"Before considering whether the concept of necessaries encompasses the provision or supply of crew, it is important to bear in mind that it has long been established that no distinction need be drawn between the supply of necessaries and the payment for such supply."
28. Identical view has been taken by a Court of Durban in M.V. Emerald Transporter 1985 2 SALR 448 with reference to the provisions contained in Admiralty Jurisdiction Regulation Act 105 of 1983 wherein it was held that services which are insured solely to the benefit of the ship owner would not be classed as necessaries. The said decision was, however, rendered in the context of ranking of claims against a fund comprising of sale proceeds of the vessel M.V. Emerald Transporter.
29. The House of Lords in The River Rima (supra) considered the provisions of Article 1(1)(k) of the 1952 Brussels Arrest Convention incorporating "goods or materials wherever supplied to a ship for her operation or maintenance" as a maritime claim. Having regard to the provisions contained in Section 6 of Admiralty Court Act, 1840 and Section 5 of Admiralty Court Act, 1861 it was held:
"In other words, what is now called a claim in respect of goods or materials supplied to a ship for her operation or maintenance is the equivalent of what used to be called a claim for necessaries, but without the restrictions which formerly applied to such a claim."
(Emphasis Supplied)
30. The Singapore High Court also in Golden Petroleum 1994 1 SLR 92 considered the expression "goods supplied to a ship for her operation and maintenance" in the following terms:
"In my opinion, bunker oil supplied to the ship for sale to other ships could not be conceived as goods supplied for her operation. The phrase 'operation of the ship' should not be equated with the business activities of the shipowner and the section as enacted could not cover goods which are loaded onto two ship only to be unloaded or disposed of soon thereafter by sale."
31. It appears that the matter is pending in appeal.
Yet again in Gatoil International (supra), it was held:
"An agreement for the cancellation of a contract for the carriage of goods in a ship or for the use or hire of a ship would, I think, show a sufficiently direct connection. It is unnecessary to speculate what other cases might be covered. Each case would require to be decided on its own facts. As regards the contract of insurance founded on in the instant appeal, I am of opinion that it is not connected with the carriage of goods in a ship in a sufficiently direct sense to be capable of coming within para (e)."
32. The question, however, is as to whether having regard to the changed situation unpaid insurance premium should be held to be a commercial necessity. With a view to answer the question it is necessary to consider as to whether a failure to insure the security is a matter which would have a bearing upon the security of the ship.
33. Whether the provisions of insurance is to be considered to be a service? A further question which may arise is as to whether such service is to the ship or not ?
INSURANCE COVERS - EXTENT OF :
34. The law of marine insurance rested almost entirely on common law. Only a few isolated points were dealt with by statute. Although, there may be a plethora of authority on some points, the decisions may be meagre on others. The interpretative changes made from time to time turned upon new commercial conditions, the old ones having become obsolete. Some countries enacted and codified marine laws while many did not. With the passage of time, the scope and ambit of the contracts of insurance increased not only having regard to the experience gathered by the contracting parties but also by the legislators and the Court. A lot of amendments in the statutes as also interpretive changes took place. The decisions rendered by different courts on marine insurance law even frequently apply to non-marine insurance. With the increase in marine traffic, the insurance law also developed and new varieties of insurance covers came into being. There has been a considerable expansion of the practice of insurance against various forums of legal liabilities which the assured may incur to the third parties.
35. P&I mutual insurances cover the liabilities of assured shipowner incurred to third parties. In Modern Admiralty Law by Aleka Mandaraka-Sheppard at page 642, it is stated:
"P&I mutual insurance (P&I associations) cover the liabilities of their assured shipowner incurred to third parties, which include cargo claims, pollution liabilities, damage to harbours, piers, etc., and personal injury' or loss of life claims, which are all excluded from the RDC clause. In addition the P&I association insures the remaining one-fourth of the assured' liability under the RDC clause. Legal costs in defending such claims are covered as well."
36. The title of a claimant to sue the defendant as regard cargo claim enquiry has been stated in Shipping Law by Simon Baughen, Second Edition at page 16-17 in the following terms:
"Does the claimant have title to sue the defendant?
'Title to sue' means the claimant's right to sue the defendant, be it in contract, tort or bailment, in respect of the transit losses it will have borne as a buyer taking delivery at the end of a chain of sale contracts. If the claimant has insured the goods and has been indemnified, then the action may be brought in its name by its insurers under the process of subrogation.
The defendant will usually be the shipowner, but may also be a charterer or a freight forwarder who has contracted as carrier. If an inaccurate bill of lading is signed, the defendant could also be the party who actually signed the bill of lading. The shipowner's liability in respect of cargo claims will generally be covered by liability insurance, known as 'P&I' (protection and indemnity) insurance. Shipowners will not be covered in respect of Claims arising out of deviation, Miss delivery and the issuing of a 'clean' bill of lading for goods that were damaged prior to loading."
37. Apart from P&I club, there exists the Inter club Agreement (ICA).
38. In Shipping Law by Simon Baughen, at page 183, it is stated :
"Another very common clause in time charters is the 'Inter-Club Agreement' (ICA). The agreement began as an agreement between the P&I Clubs as to how they would recommend settlement of cargo claims as between shipowners and charterers where the NYPE form time charter is used. It is now common for the agreement to be specifically incorporated into the time charter. Indeed the NYPE 1993 form contains a printed Clause 27 to this effect."
39. The Special Compensation P&I Club Clause (the SCOPIC clause) enumerated from Article 14 remuneration after The Nagasaki Spirit, in 1999 as a result of discontent by salvors. Although this provision affected only the salvor and the shipowner, the international groups of P&I Clubs have agreed a code of conduct giving their backing to the clause whenever a ship enters with the International Group is salved by a member of the International Salve Union. The salient features of the claim which received clarificatory amendment in 2000 are as under:
"For the clause to operate it needs to be specifically incorporated into an LOF contract, of whatever form, LOF 2000 contains a box to be ticked if the parties agree to the incorporation of the SCOPIC clause. If the clause is incorporated it then needs to be invoked by salvor. This can be done even if there is no threat to the environment. Invoking the clause completely replaces the right of the salvor to claim under Article 14, even in respect of services performed before the invocation of the clause. The provisions of Articles 14(5) and (6), however, continue to remain effective. Within two days of the clause being invoked, Clause 3 obliges the shipowner to put up security for the salvor's claim under the clause in the amount of US $ 3,000,000. If the shipowner fails to do so, Clause 4 entitles the salvor to withdraw from the SCOPIC clause, provided the security is still outstanding at the date of withdrawal.
Clause 5 provides that SCOPIC remuneration is to be calculated by reference to an agreed tariff of rates that are profitable to salvors, calculated by reference to the horsepower of the salvage tug/s employed. It also covers the salvor's out of pocket expenses. An uplift of 25% is applied to both these heads of claim. Clause 6 provides that SCOPIC remuneration is payable only in the event that it exceeds the amount of the award under Article 13. To deter salvors -from invoking SCOPIC too readily, Clause 7 provides that in the event of SCOPIC remuneration falling below the amount of the Article 13 award, that award shall be discounted by 25% of the difference between the award and the SCOPIC remuneration. Thus, where the Article 13 award is for $1,000,000 and the SCOPIC remuneration is only $600,000, the Article 13 award will be reduced by $100,000 being 25% of the difference between the two sums, giving the salvor a net award of $900,000.
The SCOPIC clause also provides for the termination of both the SCOPIC provisions and the LOF in two situations. First, the salvor can terminate if the cost of its services less any SCOPIC remunerations exceeds the value of the salved property. Secondly, the shipowner can terminate by giving five days' notice. These termination provisions do not apply if the contractor is restrained from demobilizing its equipment by a public body with jurisdiction over the area where the services are being performed. Once the clause has been invoked, the shipowner is entitled to appoint a Special Casualty Representative (SCR) to monitor the salvage services. The SCR does not impinge on the authority of the salvage master but does have the right to be kept fully informed about the progress of the salvage operations. This provision improves the flow of information back to the P&I Club whose interests will ultimately be affected by the salvage services."
[See Shipping Law by Simon Baughen - page 293]
NECESSITY OF INSURANCE COVER:
40. The necessity of a P&I cover is in commercial expediency. All P&I clubs are non-profit making companies. The owner upon entering the ship becomes the member of the P&I club and he not only pays membership fee but undertakes to pay contribution towards the losses incurred by other members of the club which are payable by the company. A new concept has come into being in terms whereof a reciprocal system has been evolved to the effect that each member is cast under a duty to refund the damage suffered by any one of them and pay, on mutual basis, each other's claim. Thus, the members play a dual role of both beneficiary and benefactor. We have noticed the concept of such clubs. The Indian statutes operating in the field are pointer to the fact that such insurance has become more and more commercially expedient. No ship having regard to the ramification in international law can sail without such insurance. Apart from the 1952 Brussels Arrest Convention, the Merchant Shipping (Oil) Pollution Act, 1961 makes insurance compulsory.
41. As would be noticed hereinafter, P&I insurance cover to call at major ports in India is new a statutory requirement,
CHANGING SCENARIO :
42. The advancement in Taw would be evident from the 1999 Arrest Convention whereby significant changes to the law relating to in rem claims and arrest has been made. Pursuant to Article 14 of the 1999 Arrest Convention, such changes would come into force six months after ratification by the 10th State.
43. The countries which have ratified the Convention are as follows:
"Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Republic of, Egypt, Fiji, Finland, France, Overseas Territories, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guyana, Guinea, Haiti, Haute-Volta, Holy, Seat, Ireland, Italy, Khmere Republic, Kiribati, Latvia, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Marocco, Mauritania, Mauritius, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, North Borneo, Norway, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Sarawak, Senegal, Seychelles, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arabic Republic, Tchad, Togo, Tonga, Turks Isles and Caicos, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain, and Northern Ireland, United Kingdom (Overseas Territories), Gibraltar, Hong-Kong (1), British Virgin Islands, Bermuda, Anguilla, Caiman Islands, Montserrat, St. Helena, Guernsey, Falkland Islands and dependencies, Zaire."
44. Article 1 of the Convention contemplates an expansion of existing categories of arrest able claims under the following headings, some of which, namely, heading (c) and (d) are already reflected in Section 20(2) of the Supreme Court Act, 1981:
(a) this refers to 'loss or damage caused by the operation of the ship' rather than 'damage done by a ship' and would encompass claims for pure economic loss.
(c) this extends the category of salvage to include claims arising from salvage agreements or special compensation under Article 14 of the 1989 Salvage Convention;
(d) this covers damage to environment, including threatened damage...
(l) this extends the scope of claims in respect of supply of goods and materials to a ship to cover 'provisions, bunkers, equipment (including containers) supplied or services rendered to the ship for its operation, management, preservation or maintenance';
(m) this extends the scope of claims against ships by shipyards to cover 'construction, reconstruction, repair, converting or equipping of the ship'...
(o) this extends the scope of claims in respect of port dues, and also in respect of wages which will now cover repatriation costs and social insurance contributions...
(u) this extends the scope of claims in respect of mortgages by removing the reference to a registered or registrable mortgage, thereby encompassing unregistered mortgages...
45. The purpose of the 1952 Convention was to restrict the possibilities of arrest with regard to seagoing vessels flying the flag of a contracting State. Such an arrest was allowed for maritime claims against the vessel or against the sister ship belonging to the same owners. What would be the maritime claim is specified in Article 1 of the Convention. Other claims can only be secured if the vessel's home port is situated in a non-contracting State.
46. Apart from those restrictions resulting from the Convention, all kinds of claims can be secured by an arrest and there is no need to prove a connection with the operation of the vessel. As for example, a guarantee given by the owners for a subsidiary company or other principal debtor is as suitable as a claim resulting from the purchase of the ship or any other goods by the owners. However, in terms of Article 1(k) of the Convention claims for "goods or materials" supplied to a ship for her operation or maintenance are acknowledged as maritime claims.
47. What was expressly excluded in 1952 convention has been included in 1999 convention. The restrictions imposed under 1952 convention as regard 'Maritime claim' to operation of ship and maintenance thereof have been removed.
48. In Kapila Hingorani v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0403/2003 : (2003)IIILLJ31SC this Court observed:
"Justice Holmes expressed the following view in Missouri v. Holland 252 US 416 (433)3 :
"When we are dealing with words that also are a constituent act, like the Constitution of the United States, we must realise that they have called into life a being the development of which could not have been foreseen completely by the most gifted of its begetters. It was enough for them to realise or to hope that they had created an organism, it has taken a century and has cost their successors must sweat and blood to prove that they created a nation. The case before us must be considered in the light of our whole experience and not merely in that of what was said a hundred years ago."
Justice Frankfurter elucidated the interpretive role in "Some Reflections on the Reading of Statutes" :
"There are varying shades of compulsion for judges behind different words, differences that are due to the words themselves, their setting in a text, their setting in history. In short, judges are not unfettered glossators. They are under a special duty not to overemphasize the episodic aspects of life and not to undervalue its organic processes - its continuities and relationships"
In Jagdish Saran and Ors. v. Union of India MANU/SC/0067/1980 : [1980]2SCR831 , it is stated:
"Law, constitutional law, is not an omnipotent abstraction or distant idealization but a principled, yet pragmatic, value-laden and result-oriented, set of propositions applicable to and conditioned by a concrete stage of social development of the nation and aspirational imperatives of the people. India Today - that is the inarticulate major premise of our constitutional law and life."