MANU/SC/0519/2001
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Appeal (civil) 6057-6058 of 2001, Special Leave Petition (civil) 20494-95 of 2000
Decided On: 31.08.2001
Appellants: Live Oak Resort P. Ltd. and Ors.
vs.
Respondent: Panchgani Hill Station Municipal Council and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.P. Misra and U.C. Banerjee, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellants A.K. Ganguli, Kailash Vasdev, Sr. Advs., J. Reis, Y. Choudhary and Mrs. V.D. Khanna, Advs
For Respondents: Ms. Indu Malhotra, Makarand D. Adkar, Vishwajit Singh and S.D. Singh, Advs.
Subject: Environment
Subject: Property
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 226
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 136
Cases Referred:
Goa Foundation, Goa v. Diksha Holdings Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. MANU/SC/0682/2000; People United for Better Living in Calcutta Public & Anr. V. State of West Bengal & Ors. MANU/WB/0025/1993
Citing Reference:



Affirmed
  1

Relied On
  1

Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Case Note:

Property - consideration - Sections 37, 45, 154 and 156 of Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 - whether Municipal Council can demolish unauthorised construction where sanction still pending with director - respondent issued notification for consideration of sanction from Director whom property made basement, first floor and second floor - appellant applied before Director for sanction of map which takes minimum 60 days - High Court issued public interest litigation for demolishing all property which falling under notification - appellant property cannot be demolished till sanction order.
Industry: Hospitality
JUDGMENT
U.C. Banerjee, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The appellants herein, moved this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution of India seeking special leave to appeal against the orders of the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in the matter of dismissal of the writ petition being No. 2226 of 1999 dated 10th July, 2000 as also an order of dismissal of the Review Petition dated 6th November, 2000. By the impugned order of dismissal, the High Court did lend its concurrence to an order of demolition of an additional floor constructed by the appellants in Panchgani said to be in violation of the Municipal Rules as also of the direction contained in an earlier judgment of the same High Court in a public interest litigation being No. 2754 of 1997 wherein the High Court has dealt with a circular issued by Urban Development, Public Health and Housing Department in 1971. Incidentally, be it noted that various public interest petitions have been filed before the High Court seeking to prevent construction and/or regular constructions in the Mahabaleshwar Panchgani area in the State of Maharashtra being an ecologically sensitive belt. In the writ petition filed by the Bombay Environmental Action Group the bone of contention of the appellants had been that there was large scale illegal construction and deforestation in the Mahabaleshwar Panchgani region resulting in wide spread environmental and ecological degradation to these two hill stations in the State of Maharashtra. The High Court upon consideration of the pleadings and the facts on record passed various orders from time to time and finally dealt with the matter in its judgment dated 18th November, 1998 containing certain directions in order to put an embargo to the constant exploitation of nature resulting in ecological imbalance in the area and thus to avoid the bio-diversity crisis. The appellants herein were also parties therein as respondent No. 17.
3. Ecological imbalance and non-conformity of the Municipal Rules are however two independent and separate factors to invoke the jurisdiction of the law courts and either of the two factors however would prompt the law courts to pass necessary orders by reason therefore to protect the environment.
4. Before adverting to the contextual facts in the present appeals under Article 136 of the Constitution, the earlier order of the Bombay High Court spoken of hereinbefore in this judgment dated 18th November, 1998 ought to be adverted to so as to appreciate the resultant culmination on to the issuance of an order of demolition by the Panchgani Municipal Council and subsequent concurrence thereof by the High Court in a writ petition filed by the appellants herein.
5. Incidentally, be it noted that the two hill stations of Panchgani and Mahabaleshwar recently have been acclaimed to be very popular tourist resorts and tourism has thus turned out to be a great economic benefactor to the State - and it is this possible improved economic situation that the State Government in the year 1971 issued a circular (more fully dealt with hereinafter in this judgement) under which an additional FSI was made available to the luxury hotels (with 3 star facilities and above) - obviously the State Government at the time of issuance of the circular had in its mind the long catena of cases of this Court as also that of various High Courts that while ecology cannot be given a go by, in the same vein development process cannot be ignored: As a matter of fact the law courts thus evoked the factum of striking of a balance between the development and ecology since in a developing economy there cannot be either development or ecology but both must exist and thus a balance shall have to be struck between the two, as otherwise the society will perish in the absence of either of the two elements noticed above.
6. In this context, two decisions ought to be adverted to briefly: one from the Calcutta High Court and the other of this Court. In the Calcutta High Court, People United for Better Living in Calcutta Public & Anr. V. State of West Bengal & Ors. MANU/WB/0025/1993 : AIR1993Cal215 the Single Judge in paragraph 2 of the Report observed:
"2. While it is true that in a developing country there shall have to be developments but that development shall have to be in closest possible harmony with the environment as otherwise there would be development but no environment, which would result in total devastation, though however, may not be felt in present but at some future point of time, but then it would be too late in the day, however, to control and improve the environment. Nature will not tolerate us after a certain degree of its destruction and it will in any event, have its toll on the lives of the people: Can the present day society afford to have such a state and allow the nature to have its toll in future - the answer shall have to be in the negative: the present day society has a responsibility towards the posterity for their proper growth and development so as to allow the posterity to breathe normally and live in a cleaner environment and have a consequent fuller development : time has now come therefore, to check and control the degradation of the environment and since the Law Courts also have a duty towards the society for its proper growth and further development and more so by reason of definite legislations in regard thereto as noted hereinafter, it is a plain exercise of the judicial power to see that there is no such degradation of the society and there ought not to be any hesitation in regard thereto - but does that mean and imply stoppage of every developmental programme - the answer is again 'no' : There shall have to be a proper balance between the development and the environment so that both can co-exist without affecting the other. On the wake of the 21st century, in my view, it is neither feasible nor practicable to have a negative approach to the development process of the country or of the society, but that does not mean, without any consideration for the environment. As noted above, there should be a proper balance between the protection of environment and the development process: the society shall have to prosper, but not at the cost of the environment and in the similar vein, the environment shall have to be protected but not at the cost of the development of the society - there shall have to be both development and proper environment and as such, a balance has to be found out and administrative actions ought to proceed in accordance therewith and not de hors the same."