MANU/SC/1505/2016
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 11004 of 2016 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 33119 of 2013)
Decided On: 21.11.2016
Appellants: Lok Prahari thr. its Gnrl. Secy, S.N. Shukla
Vs.
Respondent: State of U.P. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
T.S. Thakur, C.J.I., A.M. Khanwilkar and Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: S.N. Shukla and Party-in-Person
For Respondents/Defendant: P.N. Mishra, Sr. Adv. and P. Ratnamala, Adv.
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Election
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 243ZD
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Uttar Pradesh District Planning Committee Act, 1999;Constitution of India - Article 136, Constitution of India - Article 226, Constitution of India - Article 243G, Constitution of India - Article 243W, Constitution of India - Article 243ZD, Constitution of India - Article 243ZE, Constitution of India - Article 282
Cases Referred:
Bhim Singh v. Union of India MANU/SC/0327/2010 : (2010) 5 SCC 538; Rajendra Shankar Shukla v. State of Chhattisgarh MANU/SC/0802/2015 : (2015) 10 SCC 400
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER - SLPs FILED AGAINST JUDGMENTS/ORDERS PASSED BY THE HIGH COURTS IN WRIT PETITIONS FILED AS PIL
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  2

Case Note:
Constitution - Budgetary grants - Legality of Scheme - Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme provides for annual budgetary grants to Members of Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council for facilitating development work in their constituencies - Appellant failed in challenge to legality of Scheme - High Court dismissed petition - Hence, present appeal - Whether issue, which was sought to be canvassed before High Court, was not considered in judgment of Constitution Bench

Facts:

The Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) provides for annual budgetary grants by the Union Government to enable Members of Parliament to recommend work of a developmental nature with an emphasis on creating durable community assets based on local necessities in their constituencies. The constitutional validity of the Scheme was adjudicated upon and upheld in a judgment of a Constitution Bench of the present Court in Bhim Singh v. Union of India. In the State of Uttar Pradesh, a scheme known as the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme was introduced with an allocation of Rupees fifty lakhs for every Member of the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council. The allocation under the Scheme was enhanced to Rupees seventy five lakhs. The Appellant moved the High Court in its writ jurisdiction seeking to challenge the constitutionality of the Scheme and for obtaining an order restraining the state from enhancing the budgetary outlay from Rupees seventy five lakhs to one crore per MLA/MLC, as was proposed. The Division Bench of the High Court held that there is no distinction between MPLADS and the Scheme since under both the central and the state schemes, the recommended work has to relate to one district or the other within the country. While dismissing the writ petition, the High Court held that the judgment of the Constitution Bench in Bhim Singh was dispositive of the controversy. In the concluding part of its judgment and order, the High Court dwelt on the grievance which was urged by the Appellant on the lack of accountability in respect of moneys disbursed under the scheme and certain allegations of the misuse of funds which the Appellant had addressed, primarily based on certain newspaper reports. The High Court granted liberty to the Appellant to formulate its suggestions for consideration by the Principal Secretaries in the Department of Planning and Development and the Legislative Department of the State Government. Aggrieved by the inaction of the State Government in dealing with the representation submitted by it, the Appellant moved a contempt petition before the High Court. Eventually, an order was passed by the Principal Secretary in the Rural Development Department of the State Government and by the Principal Secretary in the Planning Department.

Held, while disposing off the appeal:

(i) In Bhim Singh, this Court had upon a careful analysis of the guidelines framed under MPLADS noted that the function of a Member of Parliament under Clause 3.1 is merely to "recommend a work". On the other hand, the district authorities are assigned with the authority to decide upon the feasibility of the work recommended, assess the requirement of funds, engage the implementation agency, supervise the work and to ensure financial transparency in the form of audit and utilization certificates. The judgment in Bhim Singh emphasised that MPLADS merely supplements the welfare schemes of the states and other local authorities and does not interfere in the functional or financial domain of the local planning authorities. There can be no objection to the state implementing a scheme of the nature that was upheld by the Constitution Bench in Bhim Singh, the safeguards which form a part of the MPLAD Scheme should be duly considered so as to ensure that the role which is ascribed to the district planning authorities and institutions of local self-governance is not denuded. The safeguards which must be introduced shall include (i) the role of the elected representatives would be to recommend the work of a developmental nature in their constituencies within the budget allotted under the Scheme; (ii) the feasibility of the work, estimate of funds, selection of the implementing agency and supervision of work must be independently determined by a nominated authority or body of the State government; (iii) panchayati raj institutions in rural areas and municipal bodies in urban areas may be considered as preferred implementing agencies having regard to the entrustment of responsibilities under Parts IX and IXA of the Constitution; (iv) the plans prepared by the District Planning Committees Under Article 243ZD read with the Uttar Pradesh District Planning Committee Act, 1999 may be made available by every district Collector to elected representatives to enable them to decide whether any developmental work which has already been identified in the above plan should be executed in pursuance of the funds made available under the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme; and (v) sufficient safeguards should be provided to ensure against conflicts of interest such as the allocation of funds to institutions controlled by an elected representative or a member of his or her family; and (vi) The scheme must include sufficient safeguards to ensure financial transparency, such as proper supervision of work, monitoring quality and timely completion besides procedures to ensure proper audit and utilization of funds. [17] and[20]

(ii) The High Court rightly took view that the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme does not per se violate Article 243ZD or the Uttar Pradesh Planning and Developmental Act, 1999. Elected representatives have a vital role in democracy. They have an intrinsic connection with their constituencies and have a legitimate role to discharge in meeting the development needs of their constituencies. Article 243ZD does not exclude their role. On the contrary, they perform a supplemental role by enhancing and supporting the work of the institutions of local self-governance. However, it is necessary that the guidelines which have been formulated by the State Government are revisited and the directions set out above are complied with so as to ensure that the guidelines are in conformity with the spirit and underlying purpose of Parts IX and IXA of the Constitution in terms as held by the Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhim Singh. The revised guidelines shall apply to all projects to be undertaken hereafter under the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme. [21]
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.05.2013 of the Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court in Writ Petition No. 1235 (M/B) of 2004 (MANU/UP/3046/2013)
Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. The Appellant has failed in a challenge to the legality of the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme in the State of Uttar Pradesh which provides for annual budgetary grants to Members of the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council for facilitating development work in their constituencies.
The Allahabad High Court by a judgment and order dated 13 May 2013 dismissed the writ petition Under Article 226 of the Constitution. This has given rise to the institution of these proceedings.
3. In 1993, the Prime Minister of India announced a scheme, popularly known by the acronym MPLADS (an abbreviation for Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme). The Scheme provides for annual budgetary grants by the Union Government to enable Members of Parliament to recommend work of a developmental nature with an emphasis on creating durable community assets based on local necessities in their constituencies. The constitutional validity of the Scheme was adjudicated upon and upheld in a judgment of a Constitution Bench of this Court rendered on 6 May 2010 in Bhim Singh v. Union of India MANU/SC/0327/2010 : (2010) 5 SCC 538.
4. In the State of Uttar Pradesh, a scheme known as the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme was introduced in the State Budget in 1998-1999 with an allocation of Rupees fifty lakhs for every Member of the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council. In the Budget of 2000-2001, the allocation under the Scheme was enhanced to Rupees seventy five lakhs. The Appellant moved the High Court in its writ jurisdiction in 2004 seeking to challenge the constitutionality of the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme and for obtaining an order restraining the state from enhancing the budgetary outlay from Rupees seventy five lakhs to one crore per MLA/MLC, as was proposed. The Appellant submitted that if the challenge to the validity of the Scheme is not accepted, then in the alternative, the moneys allocated under the Scheme should be permitted to be utilized only for meeting the expenditure on schemes which have been sanctioned under the district plan pursuant to the provisions of Article 243ZD and the U.P. District Planning Committee Act, 1999.
5. The primary submission of the Appellant before the High Court (and in these proceedings Under Article 136 of the Constitution as well) is that the field of development plans for districts is occupied by virtue of the provisions contained in Article 243ZD and the enactment of the state legislature noted above. According to the Appellant, it is only the District Planning Committee which can identify or approve of a development plan. Hence, it was urged that elected representatives of the state legislature cannot be permitted to select a scheme other than what is within the purview of an approved development plan prepared by the District Planning Committees under the state legislation of 1999. The judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Bhim Singh (Supra) had been rendered during the pendency of the writ petition in the High Court. The Appellant sought to make a distinction between crucial aspects of MPLADS which distinguish from the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme in Uttar Pradesh. Moreover, it was urged that the judgment of the Constitution Bench would not conclude the issue since Article 243ZD and the provisions of the state legislation of 1999 would apply to the state scheme (and not MPLADS).
6. The Division Bench of the High Court held that there is no distinction between MPLADS and the Vidhayak Nidhi Scheme since under both the central and the state schemes, the recommended work has to relate to one district or the other within the country. The High Court adopted the view that the power of identifying and recommending work of a developmental nature conferred upon the elected representatives-be they Members of Parliament under MPLADS or MLAs/MLCs under the state scheme is supplemental to the power vested in the District Planning Committee constituted under the state legislation. Hence, while dismissing the writ petition, the High Court held that the judgment of the Constitution Bench in Bhim Singh was dispositive of the controversy.
7. In the concluding part of its judgment and order, the High Court dwelt on the grievance which was urged by the Appellant on the lack of accountability in respect of moneys disbursed under the scheme and certain allegations of the misuse of funds which the Appellant had addressed, primarily based on certain newspaper reports. The High Court granted liberty to the Appellant to formulate its suggestions for consideration by the Principal Secretaries in the Department of Planning and Development and the Legislative Department of the State Government. Dealing with that aspect, the High Court observed as follows:
Since the main prayer in this writ petition has already been discussed above and not found acceptable, the writ petition is dismissed but liberty is granted to the Appellant to formulate its suggestion for consideration by the Principal Secretary, Planning and Development, U.P. Government as well as Principal Secretary, Legislative Department, U.P. Government. We are also of the view that suggestion should receive serious consideration of all the concerned authorities for the simple reason that public money should always be accountable and State has a duty to take all possible steps to prevent misuse of public money particularly when murmur against perceived misuse of Vidhayak Nidhi is becoming more audible. We expect the authorities to act in the matter with due sincerity and promptitude so that there is no occasion for any further public interest litigation in the matter.
(Emphasis supplied)
Aggrieved by the inaction of the State Government in dealing with the representation submitted by it, the Appellant moved a contempt petition before the High Court. Eventually, an order was passed by the Principal Secretary in the Rural Development Department of the State Government on 21 May 2014 and by the Principal Secretary in the Planning Department on 17 June 2014.
8. Article 243ZD is in Part IXA of the Constitution which deals with Municipalities. Parts IX (which deals with Panchayats) and IXA were introduced by the seventy third and seventy fourth constitutional amendments. Article 243ZD provides for the constitution of District Planning Committees for every district in each state for the preparation of a draft developmental plan for the district as a whole. The provision also enables the legislature of each state to enact legislation setting down the composition of the District Planning Committees, the manner in which seats on the Committees shall be filled up and the functions of the Committees, relating to district planning among other things Article 243ZD is as follows:
243ZD. Committee for district planning
(1) There shall be constituted in every State at the district level a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole;
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision, with respect to-
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled:
Provided that no less than four-fifths of the total number of members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district;
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may be assigned to such Committees;
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen.
(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development plan-
(a) have regard to-
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation;
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial and otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organizations as the Governor may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.
9. In preparing the draft development plans, the District Planning Committee is to have regard to the matters of common interest between panchayats and municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other physical or natural resources and the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation. Moreover, each committee must have due regard to the available resources, financial and otherwise.
10. In exercise of the power conferred by Clause (2) of Article 243ZD, the state legislature of Uttar Pradesh enacted the U.P. District Planning Act, 1999 to effectuate the constitutional provisions for the setting up of District Committees and for the preparation of development plans for the districts. The importance of the provisions of Article 243ZD has been noticed in a judgment of a Bench of two learned Judges of this Court in Rajendra Shankar Shukla v. State of Chhattisgarh MANU/SC/0802/2015 : (2015) 10 SCC 400:
17. After the insertion of Part IXA in the Constitution, development plan for a district can only be drawn by the democratically elected representative body i.e. DPC, by taking into account the factors mentioned in Clauses (3)(a)(i) and (ii) of Article 243ZD. As per Clause (4) of Article 243ZD, the Chairman of other DPC shall forward the development plan as recommended by the Committee to the Government of the State.