MANU/SC/0267/2022
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 1447-1467 of 2016 and 893 of 2019
Decided On: 03.03.2022
Appellants: Loop Telecom and Trading Limited
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, Surya Kant and Vikram Nath, JJ.
Subject: Media and Communication
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1997 - Section 14; INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872 - Section 56, INDIAN CONTRACT ACT, 1872 - Section 65
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 11; Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 32, Constitution of India - Article 136; Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - Section 9; Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules, 1961; Income Tax Act, 1961; Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 20, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 23, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 24, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 56, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 65, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 66; Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 120B, Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 420; Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 - Section 4, Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 - Section 4(1), Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 - Section 7B(1); Indian Trusts Act, 1882 - Section 84; Monopolies And Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 - Section 5(1); Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002; Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2000; Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14(a), Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14A, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14A(7), Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14(1), Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 14(2), Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 15, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 16, Telecom Regulatory Authority Of India Act, 1997 - Section 18
Cases Referred:
Union of India (UOI) v. Karam Chand Thapar and Brs. (Coal Sales) Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0209/2004; Union of India v. Telecom Regulatory MANU/DE/0097/1998; Cellular Operators Association of India and Ors. v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/1368/2002; Union of India (UOI) v. Tata Teleservices (Maharashtra) Ltd. MANU/SC/3396/2007; Tarsem Singh v. Sukhminder Singh MANU/SC/0158/1998; The Goa Foundation v. Sesa Sterlite Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0087/2018; T.P. Moideen Koya v. Government of Kerala and Ors. MANU/SC/0846/2004; Bhagubhai Dullabhabhai Bhandari v. The District Magistrate, Thana and Ors. MANU/SC/0011/1956; Daryao and Ors. v. The State of U.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0012/1961; Kuju Collieries Ltd. v. Jharkhand Mines Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0030/1974; Immani Appa Rao and Ors. v. Gollapalli Ramalingamurthi and Ors. MANU/SC/0051/1961; Narayanamma and Ors. v. Govindappa and Ors. MANU/SC/1332/2019; R.K. Garg and Ors. v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0074/1981; Union of India (UOI) v. Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India and Ors. MANU/SC/1468/2019; Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India MANU/SC/0089/2012 : (2012) 3 SCC 1; Union of India v. AUSPI MANU/SC/1252/2011 : (2011) 10 SCC 534; Vedanta Ltd. v. The Goa Foundation and Ors. Review Petition (Civil) Diary No. 18447 of 2020; Union of India v. Assn. of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India Civil Appeal No. 84 of 2007; Satyabrata Ghose v. Mugneeram Bangur & Co. MANU/SC/0131/1953 : 1954 SCR 310; Holman v. Johnson MANU/ENRP/0054/1775 : (1775) 1 Cowp 341 : 98 ER 1120; Patel v. Mirza MANU/UKSC/0043/2016 : (2016) 3 WLR 399; Budhulal v. Deccan Banking Company MANU/AP/0096/1954 : AIR 1955 Hyd. 69 (FB) : ILR 1955 Hyd. 101; Berg v. Sadler and Moore (1937) 2 KB 158; S. Tel. Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India; Union of India v. Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India and Ors. Civil Appeal Nos. 6328-6399 of 2015
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  15

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  6

Case Note:
Media and Communication - Entry Fee - Refund - Unified Access Service Licences (UASL) - Twenty One Service Areas -Appellant claimed entitled to refund based on civil, contractual and constitutional principles - Appellant as contended prevented from providing services under the licences since Respondent's "First Come First Serve" policy was flawed, arbitrary and illegal - Licenses were accordingly quashed which caused frustration of each licence in the nature of a contract - Whether Appellant on such claims entitled to be claim as sought?

Facts:

The Appellant claimed a refund of Entry Fee (together with interest) paid by it for 2G licences for twenty-one service areas. Earlier by the judgment of Apex Court in Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India, the 2G licences granted by the Union of India, including to the Appellant, were quashed. The Appellant claimed to be entitled to the refund of its Entry Fee.

Held, while dismissing the Appeal:

The beneficiaries of the patently unconstitutional mechanism deployed for the allocation of spectrum were corporate entities who were favoured under the "First Come First Serve" policy. The Appellant is one of them.[20]

TDSAT has correctly come to the conclusion that the claim by the Appellant for refund of the Entry Fee could not have been entertained.[38]

The Appellant has been the beneficiary of a manifestly arbitrary policy which was adopted by the Union government and which was quashed in the decision of this Court in CPIL (supra). That being the position, the Appellant would not be entitled to a refund of the Entry Fee even on the principle of restitution embodied in Section 65 of the Indian Contract Act.[55]

Appellant was in pari delicto with DoT and the then officials of the Union government. The Appellant was the beneficiary of the "First Come First Serve" policy which was intended to favour a group of private bidding entities at the cost of the public exchequer. The contention of the Appellant that it was exculpated from any wrong doing by the judgment of this Court in CPIL (supra) is patently erroneous. The process leading up to the award of the UASLs and the allocation of the 2G spectrum was found to be arbitrary and constitutionally infirm. [60]

No merit in the appeal and thus dismissed.[61]
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Industry: Telecom
JUDGMENT
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
A.
The Appeals
B.
Submissions of Counsel
C.
The CPIL judgment
D.
The claim for refund of Entry Fee
E.
Jurisdiction of TDSAT
F.
The claim founded on frustration and restitution
G.
The policy of set off
H.
Conclusion
A. The Appeals
1. These appeals Under Section 18 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act 19971 arise from the judgments dated 16 September 2015 and 11 December 2018 of the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal2. The Appellant claimed a refund of Rs. 1454.94 crores representing the Entry Fee (together with interest) paid by it for 2G licences for twenty-one service areas. By the judgment of this Court in Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India MANU/SC/0089/2012 : (2012) 3 SCC 1 ("CPIL"), the 2G licences which were granted by the Union of India, including to the Appellant, were quashed. The Appellant claims to be entitled to the refund of its Entry Fee on, as it contends, "well settled principles of civil, contractual and constitutional law".
2. The Appellant applied for the grant of Unified Access Service Licences3 for twenty-one service areas on 3 September 2007. A Letter of Intent was issued. The Appellant paid the circle wise Entry Fee of Rs. 1.1 crores and furnished a Performance Bank Guarantee and Financial Bank Guarantee for the twenty-one areas. The Appellant entered into UASL agreements on 3 March 2008 for the twenty-one service areas with the Respondent, which came into effect from 25 January 2008. Among the conditions which were stipulated in the UASL agreements, those governing the duration of the licence and the Entry Fee were in the following terms:
3. Duration of License
3.1 This LICENCE shall be valid for a period of 20 years from the effective date unless revoked earlier for reasons as specified elsewhere in the document.
[....]
18. FEES PAYABLE
18.1. Entry Fee:
One Time non-refundable Entry Fee of Rs. 1.1 crore has been paid by the LICENSEE prior to signing of this License agreement.
3. On 2 February 2012, this Court by its judgment in CPIL (supra) declared that the policy of the Union government for allocation of 2G spectrum on a "First Come First Serve" basis was illegal. As a consequence, the UASLs which were granted by the Union government were quashed. On 25 May 2012, the Appellant instituted a petition4 before the TDSAT seeking, among other things, a refund of the Entry Fee of Rs. 1454.94 crores, inclusive of interest. The Appellant has stated that on 1 June 2012 it shut down its operations after porting out all its subscribers.
4. By its judgment dated 16 September 2015, the TDSAT dismissed the First Telecom Petition holding, inter alia, that:
(i) The quashing of the Appellant's licences by this Court in its judgment in CPIL (supra) cannot be equated with the UASL agreements becoming void within the meaning of Section 65 of the Indian Contract Act 18725. This Court quashed the UASLs since it found the Union government's policy of "First Come First Serve" to be illegal and arbitrary. Hence, the Appellant cannot claim restitution Under Section 65;
(ii) The quashing of the Appellant's licences by this Court in its judgment in CPIL (supra) cannot be brought under the Indian Contract Act, since the UASL agreements had not become void Under Sections 23 and 56 of the Indian Contract Act; and
(iii) Even assuming that the Appellant's UASL agreements became void under the Indian Contract Act, its claim for restitution Under Section 65 would be governed by the principle of in pari delicto potior est conditio defendentis (in equal fault, better is the condition of the possessor). A refund of the Entry Fee could not be made until the possibility of the Appellant being in pari delicto was completely effaced. When the TDSAT delivered its judgment, the Appellant was facing trial before the Special Judge, CBI for charges Under Section 120-B and 420 of the Indian Penal Code 1860 in a case relating to the grant of UASLs.
By a judgment dated 21 December 2017, the Appellant was acquitted of criminal charges by the Special Judge, CBI. The Central Bureau of Investigation has filed a petition for leave to appeal against the order of acquittal, which is presently pending before the Delhi High Court.
5. Aggrieved by the judgment of the TDSAT dated 16 September 2015, the Appellant moved this Court in Civil Appeal Nos. 1447-1467 of 2016. On 13 May 2016, the Appellant sought liberty of this Court to withdraw the civil appeals, and to approach this Court once again if it became so necessary. Leave was accordingly granted by this Court.
6. The Appellant then instituted another petition before the TDSAT6 raising the issue of a refund of the Entry Fee, on the ground that it had been exonerated by the Special Judge, CBI. By its judgment dated 11 December 2018, the TDSAT dismissed the Second Telecom Petition noting that the Appellant had made a second attempt for claiming the same relief which had been sought earlier in the First Telecom Petition. It further held that had the TDSAT sought to provide the Appellant with the remedy of approaching it after the conclusion of the trial before the Special Judge, CBI, it would have indicated it in its judgment. Finally, it was also noted that this Court, through its order dated 13 May 2016, did not grant the Appellant the leave to approach the TDSAT but only to approach this Court.
The judgment dated 11 December 2018 has given rise to the filing of the second set of civil appeals7 by the Appellant. The Appellant also moved a Miscellaneous Application8 in Civil Appeal Nos. 1447-1467 of 2016 seeking permission for the revival of the earlier civil appeals, which had been permitted to be withdrawn on 13 May 2016.
7. By an order dated 7 January 2020, the Miscellaneous Applications seeking the revival of the first set of civil appeals were allowed, keeping open all the contentions including the contentions of the Respondents based on the earlier order dated 13 May 2016. This judgment will accordingly govern both, the original set of civil appeals which stand revived in pursuance of the order dated 7 January 2020 and the second set of civil appeals.
B. Submissions of Counsel
8. Dr. A.M. Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant, has urged the following submissions:
(i) Since the licences of the Appellant were quashed by the judgment of this Court in CPIL (supra), the Appellant is entitled to a refund of its Entry Fee based on civil, contractual and constitutional principles;
(ii) The Appellant paid an Entry Fee of Rs. 1454.94 crores for twenty-one service areas and the licences were valid for a period of twenty years. The Appellant was prevented from providing services under the licences because:
(a) This Court held that Respondent's "First Come First Serve" policy for grant of licences was flawed, arbitrary and illegal; and
(b) As a consequence, licences which were granted under said the policy (including the licences of the Appellant) were quashed;
(iii) The quashing of the licences by this Court amounted to a frustration of each licence, which was in the nature of a contract, in terms of Section 56 of the Indian Contract Act. Consequently, the Appellant is entitled to a restitution of the Entry Fee paid in terms of Section 65, as the licences were quashed not on account of the fault of the Appellant but due to the culpability of the Union government;
(iv) The well settled principle is that no person can be prejudiced because of an act of a court (actus curiae neminem gravabit);
(v) The substratum of TDSAT's decision which disallowed the claim of the Appellant in view of the pending criminal proceedings has been wiped off by the acquittal of the Appellant by the Special Judge, CBI;
(vi) The set off policy of the Union government, in terms of which a set off of the Entry Fee which was paid was granted only to those entities who participated in the fresh round of auction which took place after the judgment of this Court in CPIL (supra), is based on incorrect classification which lacks intelligible differentia and nexus to its object. Further, the set off policy suffers from manifest arbitrariness and is discriminatory. Thus, it should be struck down as being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution;
(vii) The set off policy of the Union government allowing the grant of a set off of the Entry Fee, albeit to certain bidders, is an admission of a debt that is due and payable:
(a) On 12 October 2012, the Respondent issued "Queries and Responses to an NIA" and in answer to Query Number 74 regarding the set off of Entry Fee, it was stated as follows:
A set-off is allowed against the Earnest Money and the payment due in the event of spectrum being won in this auction. The total amount of such set off shall be limited to the total entry fee paid by the entity for all its licenses which have been quashed by the Supreme Court. No interest will be due on this amount.
(b) The Empowered Group of Ministers9 held a meeting on 18 October 2012, at which a decision was taken in the following terms:
13. The EGoM considered the letter dated 12.10.2012 from the Minister of Information and Broadcasting regarding set-off of entry fee against the earnest money and payment due in the event of spectrum being won and noted that the entry fee paid by TSPs whose licenses were quashed was for a period of 20 years. While on one hand, the TSPs could be expected to have paid a pro-rata amount for the period of operation of the license, i.e. 2008-2012, on the other hand, there could be a claim for refund with interest for the pro-rata amount for the balance period. Therefore, the EGoM decided to allow such TSPs to adjust an amount equivalent to their full entry fee, without any interest, against the auction payments, both for participation and/or final payment on successful conclusion. It was clarified that the set-off would be permitted only to the quashed license holders participating in the auction. Such set-off would be allowed to the extent of total entry fee paid for all quashed licenses on an aggregate basis without consideration of the expired period of license, only if they succeed in the auction...
(emphasis supplied)
(c) Pursuant to the above policy of granting a set off, the Union government has granted a set off of the Entry Fee to Telewings (formerly Uninor), Videocon, Idea Cellular Limited and Sistema Shyam. In particular, a set off has been granted to Telewings despite there being grave criminal charges against it including, inter alia, charges under the Prevention of Corruption Act 1988;
(viii) The proposition that the policy of the Union of India to permit the grant of a set off of the Entry Fee amounts to an admission that a refund of the Entry Fee is payable and due, finds support in the decision of this Court in Union of India v. Karam Chand Thapar and Bros. (Coal Sales) Ltd. MANU/SC/0209/2004 : (2004) 3 SCC 504;
(ix) The non-refund of the Entry Fee to the Appellant is discriminatory for the following reasons:
(a) A set off towards the fee payable for the spectrum has been permitted to those Telecom Service Providers10 who participated in and won spectrum in the subsequent auction after the judgment of this Court in CPIL (supra);
(b) The licences of eight TSPs were quashed by this Court by its judgment in CPIL (supra). There cannot be any distinction or classification in law between the said eight TSPs and similar treatment must be afforded to all. The classification based on their decision to participate in the subsequent auction for refund of Entry Fee is discriminatory and has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved by the set off policy;
(c) Out of the eight TSPs, four TSPs participated in the subsequent auction and were permitted a set off of their Entry Fee towards payment for the auction allotted spectrum. Details of the cases where a set off was granted are:
The remaining four TSPs, including the Appellant, did not participate in the subsequent auction for spectrum. Their details are tabulated below:
(d) TDSAT afforded differential treatment to the Appellant due to the pendency of criminal proceedings against it. In any event, this ground ceases to exist in view of the acquittal of the Appellant of criminal charges on 21 December 2017 by the Special Judge, CBI. Following the Appellant's acquittal, there is no rationale for denying refund of Entry Fee to the Appellant;
(x) The set off policy penalises a business entity for taking a commercial decision not to participate in the subsequent auction. Whether or not an entity should have participated in the auction of spectrum following the decision of this Court in CPIL (supra) was entirely for each of them to determine and this cannot form the basis for granting or denying a set off;
(xi) The non-refund of the Entry Fee to the Appellant suffers from manifest arbitrariness:
(a) The set off policy creates a separate class between similarly placed TSPs whose licences were quashed, on the basis of whether or not a bidder or entity has chosen to participate in the fresh auction; and
(b) A business entity may have valid reasons not to participate in the fresh auction, for which it cannot be penalized;
(xii) The Appellant ought not to be punished for the wrongdoing of the Respondent:
(a) In the judgment in CPIL (supra), this Court held that the "First Come First Serve" policy of the Union government for the grant of telecom licenses was flawed, arbitrary and illegal;
(b) This Court further imposed costs of Rs. 5 crores upon those licence holders before it who had benefited at the cost of the public exchequer and had offloaded their stakes for thousands of crores in name of fresh infusion of or transfer of equity. On the other hand, costs of only Rs. 50 lakhs were imposed on those licence holders (including the Appellant) who had allegedly benefited by the wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional action of the Department of Telecommunication11 for the grant of UASLs and the allocation of the 2G spectrum band. Hence, no role was attributed to the Appellant for quashing of its licenses;
(c) In any event, the Appellant has been acquitted of criminal charges on 21 December 2017 by the Special Judge, CBI;
(d) Even otherwise, the pendency of criminal proceedings is not an impediment to proceed with civil proceedings; and
(e) The Respondent has already auctioned spectrum which was allocated earlier to the Appellant for Rs. 10,400 crores and has thus benefited twice from the same spectrum. The Respondent cannot be allowed to unjustly enrich itself by usurping the Entry Fee paid by the Appellant. The principles underlying the doctrine of unjust enrichment are duly fulfilled in the present case;
(xiii) The provisions of the Indian Contract Act would be applicable to the claim of the Appellant:
(a) TDSAT has wrongly held that the licences were quashed by this Court in the exercise of its constitutional powers, thereby ousting the provisions of the Indian Contract Act;
(b) The licence granted under the proviso to Section 4(1) of the Indian Telegraph Act 188512 is in the nature of a contract between the Government and its licensees. This proposition finds support in the judgment of this Court in Union of India v. AUSPI MANU/SC/1252/2011 : (2011) 10 SCC 534 ("AUSPI");
(c) Once the contracts were held to be void and were quashed in CPIL (supra), the consequences which are envisaged in the Indian Contract Act must follow. When a contract is discovered to be void, the benefit/advantage received by one party under the contract ought to be returned to the other party;
(d) The Appellant, when it entered into the contract with the Respondent, had no knowledge of the fact that the "First Come First Serve" policy of the Union government would be quashed by this Court. The Union government defended its policy before this Court, and thus ought to be directed to refund the Entry Fee;
(e) In the absence of any legislative intervention precluding the grant of the refund, the rights of the parties would be governed by the law of contract. Thus, the doctrine of frustration Under Section 56 and the principle of restitution Under Section 65 of the Indian Contract Act would stand attracted in the present case;
(f) Judicial orders are declaratory and retrospective in nature. The judgment in CPIL (supra) relates back to the validity of the licences. The Appellant had only six thousand subscribers before the licences were quashed and was in the phase of rolling out and investing capital as a result of which it did not acquire any substantial benefit;
(g) Since the licences were provided on a representation that they would have a tenure of twenty years but were declared to be void within four years due to the flawed policy of the Union Government, the Appellant will be entitled to refund of the Entry Fee with interest; and
(h) The Respondent is estopped from relying upon the UASL Guidelines and UASL agreements, which provide that the Entry Fee is non-refundable. This is because the licences were not quashed either due to a default on part of the Appellant or its withdrawal, but due to the policy of the Union government being found to be illegal and arbitrary; and
(xiv) The decisions13 of this Court in the relation to the payment of Adjusted Gross Revenue14 have no relevance to the present case.
9. Opposing the submissions which have been urged on behalf of the Appellant, Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing on behalf of the Union of India has urged the following submissions:
(i) The Entry Fee paid by the Appellant is specifically made non-refundable by the UASL Guidelines which were issued by the DoT on 14 December 2005. Once the Letters of Intent were issued to the Appellant for twenty-one service areas, the Appellant deposited the Entry Fee for each circle in accordance with the UASL Guidelines on 10 January 2008. The Appellant became eligible for the issuance of UASLs for each of the twenty-one service areas only thereafter. The UASL agreements which were entered into between the Union Government and the Appellant on 4 March 2008 expressly contemplated that the Entry Fee was a one-time non-refundable fee. The Entry Fee being non-refundable in nature, the Appellant cannot now seek a refund;
(ii) The issues which are sought to be raised in the present civil appeals are squarely governed by the judgment in CPIL (supra). The judgment of this Court examined the validity of the licences and spectrum allocation made to the licensees including the Appellant. The judgment in CPIL (supra) found that the licensees had unfairly gained access to the then Minister in-charge as well as certain officers of the DoT in order to gain preferences. This Court found that the grant of licences was "stage-managed' to favour specific licensees, including the Appellant, as a result of which costs of Rs. 50 lakhs were also imposed on them;
(iii) While quashing the grant of the licences, the judgment in CPIL (supra) did not grant any refund of the Entry Fee. The claim for restitution not having been allowed by this Court in CPIL (supra), the Appellant cannot seek to do so at this stage;
(iv) After the judgment in CPIL (supra) quashing the UASLs granted to the Appellant, the Appellant has ceased to be a licensee for the purposes of Section 14(1)(a) of the TRAI Act, which empowers the TDSAT to adjudicate disputes between a licensor and a licensee. The TDSAT did not have jurisdiction under the provisions of Section 14(1)(a). In any event, the TDSAT by its judgment dated 16 September 2015 rejected the Appellant's claim for refund on the ground that it was incompetent to do so, the licences having been quashed by the judgment of this Court. Having moved this Court in the first set of civil appeals, the Appellant withdrew the civil appeals on 13 May 2016, though with liberty to move this Court again, if it became so necessary. Thus, in view of the order dated 13 May 2016, the Appellant could have only moved this Court and not TDSAT. However, it instituted a Second Telecom Petition before the TDSAT. The TDSAT by its judgment dated 11 December 2018 rejected the second attempt of the Appellant for claiming the same relief, since this would essentially amount to a review of the judgment in CPIL (supra). Thus, moving the Second Telecom Petition was not only contrary to Section 14 of the TRAI Act but also in violation of the text and spirit of the order dated 13 May 2016 of this Court;
(v) The decision of the EGoM dated 31 October 2012 granting set off to those bidders who had participated and were found to be successful in the fresh round of auctions was a one-time concession offered to TSPs whose licences were quashed earlier, in order to ensure that telecom services were provided to consumers in an uninterrupted manner. The decision in CPIL (supra) did not bar licensees from participating in the subsequent auction. Since the Entry Fees paid by licensees covered by the judgment in CPIL (supra) could not have been refunded, the EGoM decided to adjust their Entry Fee in the subsequent auction in the event that they were declared successful. It was believed that this would encourage the participation of all TSPs in the subsequent auction and increase the prospects of a higher price discovery, thereby ultimately benefitting the public exchequer. This set off policy was uniformly applied to all licensees covered by the judgment in CPIL (supra), including the Appellant, and thus is not discriminatory. No TSP covered by the decision in CPIL (supra) was compelled to participate in the subsequent auction being conducted by the DoT by the virtue of the set off policy. Rather, the policy only sought to increase participation in the subsequent auction by offering a concession in the form of set off of the previously paid Entry Fee, in case they emerged successful in the fresh auction. Being a policy decision involving industry specific issues, this Court should be circumspect in interfering with this decision of the Union government;
(vi) The acquittal of the promoters of the Appellant in the criminal case has no bearing on the refund of the Entry Fee. The judgment of the Special Judge, CBI acquitting the promoters of the Appellant was only concerned with the alleged violation of Clause 8 of the UASL Guidelines issued by DoT. The acquittal has no bearing on the findings of this Court in CPIL (supra), according to which UASL and allocation of spectrum was held to be "stage managed" and violative of the principles of public law. This precludes the Appellant from claiming any refund or restitution; and
(vii) As a matter of fact, the judgment of this Court in CPIL (supra) has imposed costs of Rs. 50 lakhs on the Appellant for wrongly benefitting from the wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional exercise of licence and spectrum allocation. Consequently, even under the contract law, the Appellant is disentitled from claiming any refund or restitution of the Entry Fee based on the principle of in pari delicto.
10. In the submissions made in the rejoinder, both Dr. A.M. Singhvi and Mr. Huzefa A. Ahmadi, learned Senior Counsel, have submitted that the judgment in CPIL (supra) does not expressly or impliedly bar the refund of Entry Fee. As a matter of fact, the TDSAT held that the decision of this Court was not conclusive in ruling out a refund. The judgment in CPIL (supra) was reserved on 17 March 2011 and was delivered on 2 February 2012, and the quashing of the licences could not have been contemplated by any of the litigants. Theoretically, even if the claim for restitution could have been made before this Court at that stage, the Appellant is not precluded from raising the claim before this Court in the present proceedings. Further, Sections 14 and 15 of the TRAI Act confer a plenary remedy before the TDSAT. Hence, the Appellant moved the TDSAT within a few weeks of the judgment in CPIL (supra). It was urged that for the principles of constructive res judicata to apply, the bar must be clearly evident. In a Public Interest Litigation petition, it would not be appropriate to apply the principles of constructive res judicata against the Respondent (the Appellant herein) save in an exceptional case. Elaborating on the above submissions, Mr. Huzefa Ahmadi urged that:
(i) The right to claim restitution would arise only after the licences were quashed by this Court and hence, the decision in CPIL (supra) does not operate as constructive res judicata;
(ii) The relief sought before this Court in the public interest petition Under Article 32 of the Constitution which led to the decision in CPIL (supra) was the setting aside of the auction and damages. This Court did not grant damages per se while it imposed costs on the licensees. Hence, in terms of Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, the prayer for damages must be deemed to have been refused; and
(iii) The ultimate direction in CPIL (supra) was that its observations would not apply to other proceedings and hence, there was no intent to foreclose other rights under the law.
In view of these premises, it has been urged that the petition Under Article 32 which led to the decision in CPIL (supra) did not seek the forfeiture of the Entry fee and hence, the principles of constructive res judicata would find no application at all. This Court having imposed costs of Rs. 5 crores on one set of licensees and Rs. 50 lakhs on another group of licensees (which included the Appellant), it would be wholly disproportionate to forfeit an amount of Rs. 1454.94 crores in the absence of an implied forfeiture in terms of the earlier decision of this Court.
11. The rival submissions will now be analysed.
C. The CPIL judgment
12. The decision of this Court, which was rendered on 2 February 2012, arose from petitions Under Article 32 of the Constitution. The petitions questioned the grant of UASLs to the private Respondents in those proceedings (which included the Appellant), on the ground that the procedure which was adopted by DoT was arbitrary, illegal and in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution. Among the grounds of challenge, it was urged that:
(i) Since the cut-off of 25 September 2007 fixed for considering the applications had been held to be arbitrary by the Delhi High Court (which was approved by this Court), the procedure adopted by DoT with the approval of the Minister for Communications and Information Technology was liable to be declared as arbitrary and illegal;
(ii) The DoT had violated the recommendations made by Telecom Regulatory Authority of India15 that there should be no cap on the number of access service providers in any service area;
(iii) As noted in the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General, the consideration of a large number of ineligible applications and the grant of licences to them was illegal and arbitrary;
(iv) The method adopted by DoT for grant of licences was flawed because it was based upon the recommendations made by TRAI, which were arbitrary and contrary to public interest, since they recommended the granting of licences at the entry fees which were determined in 2001;
(v) While granting licences which were bundled with the spectrum at a price which was fixed in 2001, the DoT did not consult the Finance Ministry and violated the decision taken by the Council of Ministers in 2003;
(vi) The "First Come First Serve" policy violated Article 14, and its distortion by the then Minister of Communications and Information Technology and the consequent grant of licences was liable to be annulled; and
(vii) The Union government did not take any action to cancel the licences of a number of licensees who had failed to fulfil the roll-out obligations and violated the conditions of the licences.
13. While dealing with the grounds of challenge, in the course of the judgment, this Court underscored that natural resources, such as spectrum, are public goods and the doctrine of equality and public trust must guide the State in determining the actual mechanism for their distribution. After analysing the rationale adopted by TRAI for recommending the allocation of the 2G spectrum on the basis of 2001 prices, this Court held:
91. To say the least, the entire approach adopted by TRAI was lopsided and contrary to the decision taken by the Council of Ministers and its recommendations became a handle for the then Minister of Communications and Information Technology and the officers of DoT who virtually gifted away the important national asset at throw-away prices by wilfully ignoring the concerns raised from various quarters including the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance and also some of its own officers. This becomes clear from the fact that soon after obtaining the licences, some of the beneficiaries offloaded their stakes to others in the name of transfer of equity or infusion of fresh capital by foreign companies, and thereby made huge profits. We have no doubt that if the method of auction had been adopted for grant of licence which could be the only rational transparent method for distribution of national wealth, the nation would have been enriched by many thousand crores.
14. This Court found a basic flaw in the "First Come First Serve" policy, holding:
94. There is a fundamental flaw in the first-come-first-served policy inasmuch as it involves an element of pure chance or accident. In matters involving award of contracts or grant of licence or permission to use public property, the invocation of first-come-first-served policy has inherently dangerous implications. Any person who has access to the power corridor at the highest or the lowest level may be able to obtain information from the government files or the files of the agency/instrumentality of the State that a particular public property or asset is likely to be disposed of or a contract is likely to be awarded or a licence or permission is likely to be given, he would immediately make an application and would become entitled to stand first in the queue at the cost of all others who may have a better claim.
15. This Court held that an auction conducted after due publicity was perhaps the best method for fulfilling the constitutional requirement of preserving equity in the alienation of natural resources. In the absence of such a mechanism, this Court held that alienation of natural resources/public property is likely to be misused by unscrupulous people who are only interested in garnering maximum financial benefit and have no respect for constitutional ethos and values.
16. In the course of its decision, this Court held, in no uncertain terms, that the then Minister for Communications and Information Technology had acted to favour some companies at the cost of the public exchequer:
97. The exercise undertaken by the officers of DoT between September 2007 and March 2008, under the leadership of the then Minister of Communications and Information Technology was wholly arbitrary, capricious and contrary to public interest apart from being violative of the doctrine of equality. The material produced before the Court shows that the Minister of Communications and Information Technology wanted to favour some companies at the cost of the public exchequer and for this purpose, he took the following steps:
(i) Soon after his appointment as Minister of Communications and Information Technology, he directed that all the applications received for grant of UAS licence should be kept pending till the receipt of the TRAI recommendations.
(ii) The recommendations made by TRAI on 28-8-2007 were not placed before the full Telecom Commission which, among others, would have included the Finance Secretary. The notice of the meeting of the Telecom Commission was not given to any of the non-permanent members despite the fact that the recommendations made by TRAI for allocation of spectrum in 2G bands had serious financial implications. This has been established from the pleadings and the records produced before this Court which show that after issuance of licences, 3 applicants transferred their equities for a total sum of Rs. 24,493 crores in favour of foreign companies. Therefore, it was absolutely necessary for DoT to take the opinion of the Finance Ministry as per the requirement of the Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules, 1961.
(iii) The officers of DoT who attended the meeting of the Telecom Commission held on 10-10-2007 hardly had any choice but to approve the recommendations made by TRAI. If they had not done so, they would have incurred the wrath of the Minister of Communications and Information Technology.
(iv) In view of the approval by the Council of Ministers of the recommendations made by the Group of Ministers in 2003, DoT had to discuss the issue of spectrum pricing with the Ministry of Finance. Therefore, DoT was under an obligation to involve the Ministry of Finance before any decision could be taken in the context of Paras 2.78 and 2.79 of the TRAI's recommendations. However, as the Minister of Communications and Information Technology was very much conscious of the fact that the Secretary, Finance, had objected to the allocation of 2G Spectrum at the rates fixed in 2001, he did not consult the Finance Minister or the officers of the Finance Ministry.
(v) The Minister of Communications and Information Technology brushed aside the suggestion made by the Minister of Law and Justice for placing the matter before the Empowered Group of Ministers. Not only this, within few hours of the receipt of the suggestion made by the Prime Minister in his letter dated 2-11-2007 that keeping in view the inadequacy of spectrum, transparency and fairness should be maintained in the matter of allocation thereof, the Minister of Communications and Information Technology rejected the same by saying that it will be unfair, discriminatory, arbitrary and capricious to auction the spectrum to new applicants because it will not give them level playing field.
(vi) The Minister of Communications and Information Technology introduced the cut-off date as 25-9-2007 for consideration of the applications received for grant of licence despite the fact that only one day prior to this, a press release was issued by DoT fixing 1-10-2007 as the last date for receipt of the applications. This arbitrary action of the Minister of Communications and Information Technology though appears to be innocuous, actually benefited some of the real estate companies who did not have any experience in dealing with telecom services and who had made applications only on 24-9-2007 i.e. one day before the cut-off date fixed by the Minister of Communications and Information Technology on his own.
(vii) The cut-off date i.e. 25-9-2007 decided by the Minister of Communications and Information Technology on 2-11-2007 was not made public till 10-1-2008 and the first-come-first-served policy, which was being followed since 2003 was changed by him on 7-1-2008 and was incorporated in press release dated 10-1-2008. This enabled some of the applicants, who had access either to the Minister or the officers of DoT to get the demand drafts, bank guarantee, etc. prepared in advance for compliance with conditions of the LoIs, which was the basis for determination of seniority for grant of licences and allocation of spectrum.
(viii) The meeting of the full Telecom Commission, which was scheduled to be held on 9-1-2008 to consider issues relating to grant of licences and pricing of spectrum was deliberately postponed on 7-1-2008 so that the Secretary, Finance and Secretaries of three other important Departments may not be able to raise objections against the procedure devised by DoT for grant of licence and allocation of spectrum by applying the principle of level playing field.
(ix) The manner in which the exercise for grant of the LoIs to the applicants was conducted on 10-1-2008 leaves no room for doubt that everything was stage-managed to favour those who were able to know in advance the change in the implementation of the first-come-first-served policy. As a result of this, some of the companies which had submitted applications in 2004 or 2006 were pushed down in the priority and those who had applied between August and September 2007 succeeded in getting higher seniority entitling them to allocation of spectrum on priority basis.
This is a clear indicator of the complicity between the Minister and the business entities he was acting to favour on the basis of the "First Come First Serve" policy.
17. This Court found that "everything was stage-managed to favour those who were able to know in advance the change in the implementation of the first-come-first served policy". It was in the backdrop of the above finding, that this Court issued the following directions:
102. In the result, the writ petitions are allowed in the following terms:
(i) The licences granted to the private Respondents on or after 10-1-2008 pursuant to two press releases issued on 10-1-2008 and subsequent allocation of spectrum to the licensees are declared illegal and are quashed.
(ii) The above direction shall become operative after four months.
(iii) Keeping in view the decision taken by the Central Government in 2011, TRAI shall make fresh recommendations for grant of licence and allocation of spectrum in 2G band in 22 service areas by auction, as was done for allocation of spectrum in 3G band.
(iv) The Central Government shall consider the recommendations of TRAI and take appropriate decision within next one month and fresh licences be granted by auction.
(v) Respondents 2, 3 and 9 who have been benefited at the cost of public exchequer by a wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional action taken by DoT for grant of UAS licences and allocation of spectrum in 2G band and who offloaded their stakes for many thousand crores in the name of fresh infusion of equity or transfer of equity shall pay costs of Rs. 5 crores each. Respondents 4, 6, 7 and 10 shall pay costs of Rs. 50 lakhs each because they too had been benefited by the wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional exercise undertaken by DoT for grant of UAS licences and allocation of spectrum in 2G band. We have not imposed costs on the Respondents who had submitted their applications in 2004 and 2006 and whose applications were kept pending till 2007.
(vi) Within four months, 50% of the costs shall be deposited with the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee for being used for providing legal aid to poor and indigent litigants. The remaining 50% costs shall be deposited in the funds created for Resettlement and Welfare Schemes of the Ministry of Defence.
(vii) However, it is made clear that the observations made in this judgment shall not, in any manner, affect the pending investigation by CBI, Directorate of Enforcement and other agencies or cause prejudice to those who are facing prosecution in the cases registered by CBI or who may face prosecution on the basis of charge-sheet(s) which may be filed by CBI in future and the Special Judge, CBI shall decide the matter uninfluenced by this judgment. We also make it clear that this judgment shall not prejudice any person in the action which may be taken by other investigating agencies under the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 and other similar statutes.
18. Reading the judgment of this Court in CPIL (supra), it is impossible to accept the submission which has been urged on behalf of the Appellant that the fraud in the "First Come First Serve" policy lay at the doorstep of the Union government alone and that the Appellant was free from taint or wrong doing. The decision of this Court held that the "First Come First Serve" policy was writ large with arbitrariness, and was intended to favour certain specific entities at a grave detriment to the public exchequer. Undoubtedly, the authors of the "First Come First Serve" policy were the official actors comprised within the Union government. But equally, the decision did not exculpate the private business entities who obtained UASLs and became the beneficiaries of their decision. The decision of this Court concludes in no uncertain terms that the then Minister of Communications and Information Technology wanted to favour some companies at the cost of the public exchequer, and that as a matter of fact the entire process was "stage-managed" to favour those who had access to the nitty-gritties of the policy in advance. As a result, the Court found that companies which had submitted applications in 2004 or 2006 were side-lined by favouring those who had applied between August and September 2007 and who "succeeded in getting higher seniority entitling them to allocation of spectrum on priority basis".
19. In the concluding part, the judgment in CPIL (supra) imposed costs of Rs. 5 crores each on three licensees on the ground that they had benefited at the cost of the public exchequer by a "wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional action" taken by DoT for the grant of licences and allocation of spectrum, and who had subsequently offloaded their stakes for many thousand crores in the name of fresh infusion or transfer of equity. On the other hand, the Appellant was amongst the four licensees who were directed to pay a cost of Rs. 50 lakhs each "because they too had been benefited by the wholly arbitrary and unconstitutional exercise undertaken by DoT for grant of UASL and allocation of spectrum of 2G band".
20. The beneficiaries of the patently unconstitutional mechanism deployed for the allocation of spectrum were corporate entities who were favoured under the "First Come First Serve" policy. The Appellant is one of them. The distinction made by the judgment of this Court between the three licensees who were subjected to costs of Rs. 5 crores and four licensees, including the Appellant, who were subject to costs of Rs. 50 lakhs was because in the case of a former their stakes had been offloaded ostensibly in the name of a fresh infusion or transfer of equity. However, it is evident that all these licensees were complicit in the illegal exercise of obtaining favours for themselves by the indulgence of those in power. That, above all, was the foundation of the decision in CPIL (supra) and the justification for quashing licences and the allocation of the 2G spectrum. This Court then directed the TRAI to frame fresh recommendations for the grant of licences and for the allocation of spectrum in the 2G band in twenty-two service areas by auction, as was done for the allocation of spectrum in the 3G band. Thus, the decision in CPIL (supra) leaves no manner of doubt that the Appellant was in pari delicto along with the Union government.
D. The claim for refund of Entry Fee
21. The nature of the Entry Fee has to be understood from the UASL Guidelines which were issued by the DoT on 14 December 2005. Clause 616 of the Guidelines required each applicant seeking a UASL for a given service area to deposit a "nonrefundable entry fee" in accordance with Annexure 1, which elucidated the quantum of the fee which was payable for different service areas. Clause 1417 indicates that the Entry Fee was payable in addition to the annual licence fee which was payable for holding a UASL.
22. Letters of Intent were issued to the Appellant for providing unified access service to twenty-one service areas. The Appellant deposited the circle wise Entry Fee, in terms of the UASL Guidelines, on 10 January 2008 in the amount of Rs. 1454.94 crores. It is only upon the payment of this Entry Fee that the Appellant became eligible to be issued UASLs in the twenty-one service areas. Clause 18.118 of the UASL agreement acknowledged the payment of a "onetime non-refundable entry fee" prior to the signing of the agreement. Thus, the Entry Fee was a onetime non-refundable fee payable. According to the Union government, this was payable by an applicant for participating in the process of obtaining the UASL and was distinguishable from the licence fee under Clause 10.119, which was relatable to the actual operation of the licence.
23. In the course of its judgment dated 16 September 2015, the TDSAT dealt with the submission of the Union of India that the Entry Fee was "non-refundable" in terms of the UASL Guidelines. Dealing with the submission, the TDSAT observed:
To us it appears that submissions based on Section 4 of the Telegraph Act or the characterisation of the entry fee in the UASL guidelines and the licence as "non-refundable" is really begging the question. The submissions would have carried weight if the Petitioners' licences were cancelled or terminated for any violation of the term of the licences or were surrendered by it by its own accord. In the facts of the present case the Petitioner failed to get entry into...the exclusive domain reserved by law for the State...
24. There is much to commend in the above line of reasoning of the TDSAT. The Entry Fee, under the terms of the UASL Guidelines and the UASL agreements, was a one-time non-refundable fee. The TDSAT held that the submission of the Union of India would have credence if the licences were terminated for breach or if the licensee were to voluntarily surrender the licence. However, this was a case where the licence was held to be unlawful, due to its grant being in breach of the constitutional mandate Under Article 14. All the licences and the allocation of spectrum came to be cancelled by the decision in CPIL (supra) on the ground that the policy and the process followed by the Union government were arbitrary, and unjustified benefits had been granted to the licensees. Thus, the TDSAT held that, strictly speaking, the contractual term stipulating that the Entry Fee was nonrefundable would not by and in itself preclude the claim for refund on the basis of the judgment of this Court in CPIL (supra), which held that the entire process leading up to the award of the licences was arbitrary and constitutional. The TDSAT having entered the above finding, for the rest of the discussion, this judgment will also proceed on that premise.
E. Jurisdiction of TDSAT
25. The Appellant has objected to TDSAT's conclusion that the Appellant's remedy does not fall in the contractual realm between itself and the Union of India. Since the public law remedy of restitution was neither claimed before nor granted by this Court in CPIL (supra), the TDSAT went into the genesis of the dispute and consequential reliefs granted by this Court. The TDSAT held that since the challenge was focused on the arbitrary and mala fide actions that were embodied in the policy of allotting 2G spectrum licences, the quashing of the licences was a necessary consequence of the grant of the licences being vitiated. Thus, the TDSAT held that "a direction for refund [is] outside the purview of the Contract Act and an exercise of Constitutional powers is clearly beyond the authority of this Tribunal [TDSAT] and in that regard the Petitioner must approach the Court that quashed its licenses, that is, Supreme Court and seek appropriate reliefs".
26. This Court will analyse whether the TDSAT had the jurisdiction to entertain the claim for a refund of the Entry Fee. The TDSAT is an adjudicatory body constituted under the TRAI Act. Initially, the TRAI was empowered to regulate the telecom sector in India and adjudicate upon disputes. The adjudicatory powers of TRAI, specifically with respect to issuing directions to DoT, were placed in issue before the Delhi High Court in Union of India v. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India MANU/DE/0097/1998 : (1998) 46 DRJ 557. The Delhi High Court held that TRAI did not possess the authority to issue directions to DoT. In order to overcome the effect of this position, the TRAI Act was amended in 2000 and the TDSAT was established. TDSAT's website20 elaborates on the Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment) Act 2000 and notes:
In order to bring in functional clarity and strengthen the regulatory framework and the disputes settlement mechanism in the telecommunication sector, the TRAI Act of 1997 was amended in the year 2000 and TDSAT was set up to adjudicate disputes and dispose of appeals with a view to protect the interests of service providers and consumers of the telecom sector and to promote and ensure orderly growth of the telecom sector...
The TRAI Act governs the functioning of the TDSAT. The jurisdiction of civil courts has been ousted by Section 15. Section 16 enables the TDSAT to regulate its own procedure, guided by the principles of natural justice. An appeal on a substantial question of law lies to this Court Under Section 18 of the TRAI Act. In the above statutory context, the jurisdiction of TDSAT will be evaluated below.
27. Section 14(a)21 of the TRAI Act empowers the TDSAT to adjudicate any dispute:
(i) Between a licensor and licensee;
(ii) Between two or more service providers; and
(iii) Between a service provider and a group of consumers.
28. The scope of the TDSAT's powers to adjudicate "any dispute" was interpreted in Cellular Operators Association of India v. Union of India MANU/SC/1368/2002 : (2003) 3 SCC 186 by a three-judge Bench of this Court. The Court held that the powers envisaged by the TRAI Act for the TDSAT are wide and it would not be appropriate for this Court to impose limitations on them. Chief Justice G.B. Pattanaik noted:
8... Chapter IV containing Section 14 was inserted by an amendment of the year 2002 and the very Statement of Objects and Reasons would indicate that to increase the investors' confidence and to create a level playing field between the public and the private operators, suitable amendment in the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 was brought about and under the amendment, a tribunal was constituted called the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal for adjudicating the disputes between a licensor and a licensee, between two or more service providers, between a service provider and a group of consumers and also to hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority. The aforesaid provision was absolutely essential as the organizations of the licensor, namely, MTNL and BSNL were also service providers. That being the object for which an independent tribunal was constituted, the power of that Tribunal has to be adjudged from the language conferring that power and it would not be appropriate to restrict the same on the ground that the decision which is the subject-matter of challenge before the Tribunal was that of an expert body.