MANU/SC/0488/2004
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Interlocutory Application Nos. 22, 1204, 1205, 1206, 1224, 1322, 1367, 1527 and 1816 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4677 of 1985 and 98/2000
Decided On: 07.05.2004
Appellants:M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent:Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Y.K. Sabharwal and B.N. Agrawal, JJ.
Counsels:
Mukul Rohatgi and Raju Ramachandran, Additional Soliciter Generals (N.P.), Kailash Vasdev, Ranjit Kumar (A.C.) and P.C. Jain (N.P.), Sr. Advs., M.C. Mehta, K.L. Mehta, Rakesh Kumar Khanna, Rashmi Khanna, Reetesh Singh, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Kant, Mohd. Arif, M.A. Chinnaswamy, K.K. Rohtagi, Praveen Jain, Gopal Jain, Bina Gupta, Nina Gupta, Vanita Bhargava, Kirpal Singh, Debasis Misra, S. Sukumaran, Divya Nair, K. Rajeev, Manoj Swarup, Anubhav Kumar, Manik Karanjawala, Sushil Kumar Jain, Naresh Khanna, P.N. Puri, Harpreet Singh, P. Venugopal, P.S. Sudheer, Vijay Kumar, Atul Sharma, B.K. Sharma, Vishwajit Singh, Vijay Panjwani, Indra Sawhney, V.B. Saharya, D.N. Goburdhan, R.C. Verma, Manish Shanker, Pinky Anand, Geeta Luthra, K.C. Kaushik, S. Wasim A. Qadri, Anil Katiyar (N.P.), B.V. Balaram Das (N.P.), Shreekant N. Terdal (N.P.), Y.P. Mahajan, T.A. Khan, P. Parmeswaran (N.P.), Kamlendra Mishra, Mukesh Verma, Rajeev Kumar Dubey, Sheil Sethi, Suresh Chandra Tripathy, Rakesh K. Sharma and R.S. Suri (N.P.), Advs. Varuna Bhandari Gugnani, Adv. for D.S. Mehra, Adv. and Varuna Bhandari Gugnani, Adv. for Kavita Wadia, Adv. for the appearing parties
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Constitution Of India - Article 21
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 243W; Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 10, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 10(2), Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 11A, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 14, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 2(a), Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 2(b), Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 2(j), Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 27, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 29(2), Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 31A, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 41, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 7, Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 8; Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 - Section 345, Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 - Section 416(1), Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 - Section 417(1), Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 - Section 461; Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 [repealed] - Section 14; National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 - Section 10, National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 - Section 3(1)
Cases Referred:
Virender Gaur and Ors. v. State of Haryana and Ors., MANU/SC/0629/1995; M.I. Builders Pvt. Ltd. v. Radhey Shyam Sahu and Ors., MANU/SC/0999/1999; Administrator, Nagar Palika v. Bharat and Ors. ; Faqir Chand and Anr. v. Shri Ram Rattan Bhanot and Anr., MANU/SC/0412/1973; Dr. K. Madan v. Krishnawati (Smt.) and Anr., (1996) 6 SCC 707; Punjab National Bank v. Arjun Dev Arora and Ors., MANU/SC/0548/1986; V.M. Kurian v. State of Kerala and Ors., MANU/SC/0205/2001; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India ; Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/1112/1996; Rylands v. Fletcher, (1868) LR 3 HL 330
Cases Overruled/Reversed:
Punjab National Bank v. Arjun Dev Arora, MANU/SC/0548/1986 1986 4 SCC 660
Citing Reference:

Mentioned
  2

Relied On
  7

Case Note:
Environment - Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Sections 2, 7, 8, 11A, 14, 29(2), 31A and 41 - Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 - Constitution of India - Article 21 - National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 - Sections 2, 3(1), 10, 10(2) and 27 - Reallocation of industries operating in residential/non confirming areas of Delhi - Issue of - Direction given for transfer of hazardous and noxious industries and heavy and large industries (H) category and some of extensive (F) category industries - Continuance of unauthorized use contrary to master plan and zonal plan by remaining 'F' category and 'B' to 'E' category light and service industry and household industries (A) category - Continuance of illegal industrialization in residential/ non confirming areas due to lack of enforcement of law by concerned authorities - Held that illegal continuance of industries would not become legality on inaction or connivance of Government authorities - Proposal for INSITU regularization showed total non-application of mind - Land cannot be permitted to be used contrary to stipulated user except by amendment of master plan after due observance of provisions of Acts and rules - Held that since Non taking of action by Government, amounted to indirectly permitting unauthorized use which amounts to amendment of master plan without following due procedure and since Proposal of INSITU regularization would lead to further congestion of Delhi instead of decongestion, Direction given for closure of all industrial units except household industry having come up in residential/non conferming areas in Delhi after 1st august 1990 - Direction given to Central Government to finalise list of permissible household industries falling in category 'A' within a period of three months and that 6,000 industrial units on waiting list to be allotted industrial plots within one year - Direction given for disconnection of water and electricity connection of the industrial units found operating after the due date of closure and in case of continuance of industrial activity, premises to be sealed within a period of not later than another one month - Further direction given for appointment of Monitoring Committee comprising (i) Chief Secretary of Delhi (ii) Commissioner of Police, Delhi (iii) Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi and, (iv) Vice-Chairman of Delhi Development Authority for stoppage of illegal industrial activity
JUDGMENT
Y.K. Sabharwal, J.
1. This case about unauthorized industrial activity in Delhi in residential area has a protracted background. The present examination is confined to the issue of industrial activity in residential/non-conforming areas to decide what directions may be issued to put an end to such illegal activity. As a result of orders passed from time to time, hazardous and noxious industries and heavy and large industries ('H' Category) have been shifted out of Delhi. Some of extensive industries ('F' category) have also been shifted out of Delhi. As per the State Government, non-polluting 'F' category industries have not been yet shifted. The question is what should be done about continued unauthorized use contrary to Master Plan and Zonal Plan by remaining 'F' category and 'B' to 'E' category (light and service industries) and household industries ('A' category industries). These industries are continuing in residential/non-conforming areas. Such activity is mostly in residential areas. It is not in dispute that most of continued industrial activity under consideration is in contravention of law except only few household industries which are continuing in residential areas. To decide the question, it is necessary to first briefly notice orders passed by this Court during last about one decade.
2. In the various orders passed in the year 1995, this Court noticed that a large number of industries were located in residential/non-conforming areas in violation of the Delhi Master Plan formulated under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (for short, 'DD Act), Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (for short, 'DMC' Act) and other statutory provisions. Noticing that the Master Plan stipulates setting up of industries only in conforming areas, i.e., the industrial areas earmarked for that purpose, it was indicated that the industries in non-conforming areas have to stop functioning. The first concern of the Court was to stop the functioning of 'H' category industries, since most of it were discharging highly toxic affluent. It was noticed that as per the affidavit filed by Mr. D.S. Negi, Secretary (Environment), Government of Delhi, it was estimated that there were 93,000 industries which were operating in Delhi and majority of these were in non-conforming use zones. Public notices by the Government invited all industries operating in non-conforming use zone to give option to shift to available industrial plots in the industrial estates. The response from the industry was very poor. The industries operating in Delhi were called upon by issue of public notices in newspapers to furnish information in respect of the product manufactured, activity carried on, area, size, number of persons employed, power load, year of commencement etc. Out of 93,000 industries, only 513 industries and 382 persons responded. It was noticed that MCD was granting licences and registering various industrial units in non-conforming areas and permitting the industries to be set up in residential areas. Naturally, a surprise was expressed by this Court that on the one hand, the Court was issuing orders to reallocate the existing industries that were operating in the residential/non-conforming areas and on the other hand MCD was permitting setting up of new industries in residential areas. According to the MCD, it was done under the directions of the State Government. The MCD was directed not to register or grant licence to any industry in the non-conforming/residential area.
3. We may also make a brief reference to the orders that were passed in the year 1996. In the order dated 19th April, 1996, noticing the contention of Solicitor General for India that certain household industries can be permitted to operate not only in residential area but in residential premises itself, the Court observed that the provisions of the Master Plan have to be complied with and in case any non- residential activity is permitted in residential area under the Master Plan that cannot be stopped. A High Powered Committee was constituted to examine which type of industries can be permitted in the residential area. The State Government was directed to issue public notices asking the industries which are operating in different residential areas of Delhi to approach the Committee for necessary permission. It was also made clear that the industries which do not obtain permission shall have to stop functioning in residential area w.e.f. January 1, 1997. It would be useful to extract the relevant part of the order dated 19th April, 1996 which reads as under :
"We make it clear and direct that no industry in any residential area of Delhi/New Delhi shall be permitted unless it has obtained the clearance of the committee and has obtained the necessary licence and the consent from the statutory authorities. All those industries which have not obtained necessary permission from the committee shall stop operating in the residential area w.e.f January 1, 1997. We direct the NCT Delhi to give wide publicity to this order so that the industries are in a position to note that they have to obtain the necessary clearance from the committee. Needless to say that while granting permission to an industry to run in a residential area, the committee shall keep in view all the conditions laid down under the Master Plan including evaluation of impact on municipal services and environment needs of the area..."
4. The orders were also passed directing the Delhi Government to issue public notices in newspapers requiring the industries in residential/non-conforming areas to apply for allotment of plots in the Industrial Estate and also giving undertaking that on such allotment they will shift from the existing place. The court thinking that the Delhi Government was now seriously processing the project of relocating the industries operating in the residential/non-conforming areas of Delhi, left the field for the Government to act on its own and relocate the industry in terms of orders dated 18th December, 1996. The Government was, however, directed to file progress report in this Court every three months.
5. It is a matter of anguish that subsequent events show that the trust that was reposed by this Court on the Government was belied in terms of the action to be taken for implementation of law, namely, the continuance of industrial activity in areas in question in conformity with the user prescribed by the Master Plan. On 8th September, 1999, it was noticed that the progress report filed indicated that though some steps had been taken but the same had not been taken in the right earnest as a result of which industries are continuing to operate in the residential zone. The Court directed that if industries in the residential area cannot be shifted and relocated for any reason whatsoever by 31st December, 1999, then those industries shall be closed down. The Government was directed to give due publicity in the newspapers so as to make the industry aware.
6. On 10th December, 1999, the State Government came up with an application (IA No. 1206), inter alia, seeking modification of the order dated 8th September, 1999 and for extension of time upto March 2004 for shifting of industries which had been found eligible for allotment of alternate industrial accommodation under the 'Relocation Scheme' subject to their functioning in conformity with the pollution norms under the existing laws. As per what the Delhi Government itself says in this application, survey conducted by Delhi Pollution Control Committee in the year 1995-96 showed that about 1,26,000 industrial units were functioning in Delhi out of which approximately 1,01,000 were in residential/non-conforming areas and only about 25,000 in approved industrial areas. The application also states that in these 1,01,000 illegally operating industrial units, about 7,00,000 workers would be employed. It was stated that closure of these industries will result in hardship to approximately 7,00,000 families.
7. The question would be can the Government plead such a justification for violation of law and throw to winds the norms of environments, health and safety or is it possible to help the workers even without violating law if there is a genuine will to do so. We would answer the question after noticing few further facts.
8. In the application (IA 1206) it has been further stated that out of 52,000 applications received under the relocation scheme in December, 1996, approximately 23,000 have been found to be eligible. The prayer in the application also is that the industrial units functioning in residential areas where concentration of industry is 70%, should be continued to operate from their existing location. The applicant thus seeks INSITU regularization. According to the Government, about 15,000 industrial units would fall in this category and another approximately 6,000 industrial units may fall in the category of household industries ('A' category).
9. At the outset, it deserves to be noticed that assuming, for the present, that facts stated above by the Government are correct and the plea of INSITU regularization is justified then, the immediate question would be as to what steps were taken by it in respect of remaining illegal and unauthorized industrial units, which number over 50,000. The Government has no answer, let alone a satisfactory answer even despite lapse of nearly five years.
10. Reference may also be made to the progress reports filed in this Court pursuant to the orders dated 18th December, 1996. The first report dated 31st March, 1997 sought extension of time for closure of those industries which had applied for allotment of industrial plots/flats and had submitted the requisite undertakings prescribed by this Court. For them extension was asked for till such time the industrial accommodation with power connections were ready in newly constructed/developed flatted factory complexes/industrial estates. Thus, the extension sought was for above category of industrial units and not others. That being the position, others could continue the illegal industrial activity only because of inaction by the Government. It is evidently total non-implementation of the statutory provisions. In yet another Report (for the period ending 31st March, 1998), it was stated that survey of industries in all districts has shown that in respect of 50,704 industrial units, 21,681 units have not applied under the relocation scheme. The same question would again arise why no action has been taken in respect of these industries. The scenario is same in respect of the progress reports filed upto the period of 30th September, 1998 regarding the relocation of industries operating in residential/non-conforming areas of Delhi.
11. Before filing IA No. 1206 of 1999 or at least in that application itself, the Government did not think it advisable to state what action it will take against those who were not found eligible or those who did not even apply and were continuing industrial activity in violation of law. Further, it did not state how many would fall in the category of INSITU regularization and in 'A' category industry. In this connection, reference may also be made to the observations in the order dated 8th February, 2001 that there was an unexplained figure of more than 32,000 industries in non-conforming areas which would not be covered by (i) INSITU regularization or (ii) fall within the expected expanded definition of 'household industry' or (iii) come under the category of industries which had applied and had been found eligible for allotment of land. It was noticed that no explanation was given with regard to these industries continuing in the non-conforming areas. The position after lapse of nearly 3 years is no better.
12. Regarding the total number of industrial units functioning in residential/non-conforming areas, different surveys have given different figures, as per the material placed before this Court by Government. There is also no clarity as to the facts and figures regarding infrastructure etc. in respect of the industrial units being considered for INSITU regularization. Although in the affidavit filed on 5th August, 2000 by the Principal Secretary and the Commissioner of Industries of the Delhi Government, it was stated that the Government had recommended INSITU regularization, it has not been stated as to what is the position of the water, electricity and other facilities for the industries; what is the planning for remaining 30% residents as they may be deprived of electricity, water and other facilities on account of over drawl by the 70% industrial units. Whether 30% who are using the premises in accordance with the permissible use in the Master Plan must continue to suffer at the hands of those who are functioning in violation of the Master Plan. This question has remained unanswered despite elaborate arguments spread over various dates. On the aspect of INSITU regularization, the stand of the Delhi Development Authority, as contained in the affidavit of its Commissioner (Planning) dated 11th September, 2000 was that the DDA was favourably considering INSITU regularization with the following conditions :
i) Building norms shall be the same as that for the residential premises.
ii) Non-pollutant/non-hazardous industries would be allowed to operate.
iii) Augmentation of infrastructure as per requirement would be undertaken to meet the growing demand as a result of conversion of these areas into manufacturing (light and service) household industries.
13. Despite lapse of about 3 years, nothing significant, either in respect of infrastructure or the other conditions, has been done. The second Master Plan of Delhi was enforced w.e.f. 1st August, 1990. In respect of 'F' Category industries, it provides that no new industrial unit shall be permitted except in the existing identified extensive industrial areas. In respect of such 'F' category industries which were already existing in non-conforming areas, the Master Plan provides that the said industrial units shall be shifted to the permissible industrial use zone within a maximum period of three years after the allotment of plots by various Government agencies. On one hand, the Master Plan stipulates the shifting of existing 'F' category industrial units within a specified time limit and on the other new industrial units have come up even after enforcement of the Master Plan and even in respect of such units the Government has not only failed to take action but has also failed to take a positive stand before this Court that immediate steps would be taken to stop such blatant violations. Further, when the Government is asked to give suggestions regarding stoppage of functioning of these industrial units, the suggestion that comes forth is that the industrial units in residential/non-conforming areas which were set up after 1996 may be directed to stop the industrial activity contrary to the Master Plan. Those violators who had commenced industrial activity in residential/non-conforming areas after 1st August, 1990 are also not being excluded from the proposal of INSITU regularization.
14. It is also necessary to note as to what stand from time to time the Ministry of Urban Development has taken on the aspect of INSITU regularization. In an affidavit dated 4th December, 2000 filed by its Deputy Secretary, reliance has been placed by the Ministry upon the statement made by its Minister on the floor of the House on November 24, 2000. In that statement, opposing regularization, the Minister said as to what Delhi we want to live, what type of legacy do we wish to bequeath to posterity and to our children and grand children; Do we want our city to become a junkyard of unauthorized constructions, mirroring civic and moral chaos, or an orderly and disciplined capital of a Resurgent Republic, embodying values of justice and honesty on the basis of which we have often claimed a pre- eminent position for our culture and civilization. The statement further gave facts and figures that 50 million gallons per day of industrial waste is going into the Yamuna and said that what is seen flowing in it today is nothing but sewer and industrial waste. In Okhla alone, for instance, during March-April, 2000, the bio- chemical oxygen demand (BOD) level in the river was about 70 mg. per litre as against a standard of 3 mg. per litre, i.e., 25 times more than the permissible level. An apprehension was expressed that if the present attitudes and practices persist, Delhi would run the risk of having as many as 30 million people in the next few years and becoming an ugly, unhealthy, unworkable and unlivable city. In the process, a fatal blow would also be dealt to the development of National Capital Region which comprises a substantial part of three important neighbouring States of Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The affidavit states that in case of large number of residential colonies, with so called 70% concentration of industries of which the entire land use is sought to be changed from residential to industrial, should the Master Plan be amended to destroy its very soul and structure or subvert the basic norms of health, habitation and environment or reward the illegal establisher of industries and in the process penalize the law-abiding residents and condemn them to stay for ever in industrial areas or force them to abandon their houses built with hard earned income? It also states that no one has made it clear where the residents would be taken, what would be cost of resettlement, who will bear it and how the layouts and pattern of services and infrastructure, meant for residential colonies, would be adjusted to the requirements of industries and consequent traffic and transport that would flow not only in the colonies in question but also in their neighbourhood.
(Emphasis supplied is ours)
15. In regard to the nature of survey that had been conducted resulting in the proposal of INSITU regularization in areas having 70% concentration of industries, the affidavit states that demand to secure vital and large scale changes in the Master Plan, which would have the effect of tearing its entire fabric apart, is based upon the preliminary and perceptional survey of three officers of the Industries Department of Government of Delhi. The report itself calls the survey 'preliminary'. The survey is neither scientific, nor precise nor reliable. It does not even contain detailed particulars of industries - whether they are polluting or non- polluting, licenced or unlicensed. The survey also does not indicate as to how many industrial units belong to those industrialists who may have already obtained the benefits of relocation once, either from the Delhi Development Authority or from the Industries Department or have secured space in flatted factories and have come back again to the non-conforming areas, while keeping the alternative plots allotted to them for shifting, or have set up additional unit or units in the residential areas.
16. Now, let us see what Ministry says after about three years in its affidavit dated 28th July, 2003. The guidelines for Master Plan for Delhi - 2021 issued by the Ministry were filed along with the said affidavit as also a letter dated 28th July, 2003 sent by Secretary of the Ministry to the Chairman of DDA. The letter states that the Ministry has made broad guidelines for the Master Plan which highlight some of concerns that need resolution as well as possible policy initiatives so as to deal with the problem that affect Delhi. The letter further states that this should also address the issue of concentration of industries to the extent of 70% or more in some non-industrial areas. The guidelines noticed that a major issue confronting the planned development of Delhi is the apparent and frequent violation of the planning and development and control norms. It states that there is a growing variation between the plan for Delhi and city on the ground and, therefore, it is essential that the Master Plan policies should be implement able in an effective manner and vigorously enforced. The existing legal framework for enforcement of the Master Plan provisions including unauthorized construction and encroachment on public land also needs examination so as to initiate proposals for its strengthening where necessary. In the guidelines, there is no specific reference to regularization as such but evidently there is a slant in that direction in the stand of the Ministry. It is, however, nobody's case that any decision about regularization has been taken.
17. Regularization cannot be done if it results in violation of right of life enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution. The question will have to be considered not only from the angle of those who have set up industrial units in violation of the Master Plan but also others who are residents and are using their premises as allowed by law. Further, the regularization affects not only the remaining 30% residents of the areas wherein regularization may be in contemplation but has affect on the entire area, particularly with respect to infrastructure available.
18. In respect of the infrastructure in housing components, what provisions should be made has been incorporated in the Master Plan - 2001 which has to be kept in view. The existing availability and projected need of water supply, sewerage, power and solid waste has been indicated in the Master Plan. None has applied his mind to any of these aspects.
19. At first instance, a proposal for INSITU regularization in 15 areas was considered. Now 24 areas are sought to be regularized. None of the aforesaid aspect regarding infrastructure has been considered before the proposal was sent by the State Government and Delhi Development Authority for INSITU regularization to the Central Government. How can Government of India agree in principle for INSITU regularisation in isolation without anyone having examined the relevant considerations. It is evident that relevant aspects such as availability of sewerage, drainage, power and water have not been examined. Further, a perusal of the survey document shows that many industrial activities were polluting in nature. The proposal was considered by Delhi Development Authority on 20th December, 2002. The note dated 20th December, 2002 notices that a large number of industrial clusters are existing in various parts of the National Capital Territory of Delhi in contravention of land use provisions of the MPD - 2001 and thereby facing the problem in their continuance on their existing site and with a view to resolve this problem a policy needs to be evolved for regularization/redevelopment of the said industrial clusters so that it may eventually be considered to be part of the MPD - 2021. It was decided that the redevelopment proposal could be formulated and taken up by forming cooperative industrial society by the beneficiaries. Total redevelopment work will be undertaken by the cooperative society at their own cost. Changes in land use and enhanced FAR facilities were directed to be paid to the concerned authorities by the society. All these proposals, without examination of the relevant consideration as noticed hereinbefore, were approved and were forwarded to the Government of India. All this has happened despite the fact that the Ministry of Urban Development, in terms of its letter dated 8th September, 2000 had informed the Delhi Development Authority that the change in the Master Plan was not justified. No detailed justification for change of land use from residential to industrial and the parameters on which such change would be based had been given. The matter has also not been discussed and deliberated with the Central Pollution Control Board, Town and Country Planning Organisation and the Delhi Urban Arts Commission. It was not made clear as to what would happen to those who are using their residential premises in accordance with the provisions of the Master Plan. The changes in the Master Plan or its norms to accommodate illegal activities not only amount to getting reward for illegal activities but also results in punishing the law abiding citizens. We may refer to another letter dated 15th November, 2001 sent by the Ministry of Urban Development to Delhi Development Authority on the issue of INSITU regularization stating that the issue of industrial housing, sanitation, infrastructure and adherence of polluting control norms have to be stressed and detailed in such studies. DDA was also asked to consider whether such areas where non-conforming industries are presently operating are isolated black spot in otherwise purely residential, semi- urban area or whether they represent logical extension of existing industrial neighbourhood. It reiterated that the quality of life, environment and the rights of the residents have to be highlighted in forefront.
20. The question cannot be examined only from the angle of the industry or even those who are employed there in the said industries. It is imperative for the State Government, Delhi Development Authority as also the Government to address itself to the larger question of not only legalizing blatant illegalities but as to what Delhi is intended to be left for the children and future generation by permitting industrialisation in residential areas. The facts demonstrate that the State Government and Delhi Development Authority have been wholly remiss of all its functions, duties and obligations. The Central Government, for the reasons which are not far to seek, has been shifting its stand. As against a definite and positive stand taken in the years 2000 and 2001 and affidavits filed in this Court, there is a shift in the stand in the affidavits filed in the years 2002 and 2003. As against the principled stand taken in the affidavits filed in the year 2000, now the stand in nutshell is that question would be considered when Master Plan for 2021 is finalized. There is no plausible answer to the question as to why in the meanwhile the illegality should continue without any action. In any case, as at present there is no regularization. The industrial activities in residential/non-conforming zones are wholly illegal.
21. The Delhi Development Authority has to bear in mind that it has to perform its function in accord with the provisions of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 which was enacted to provide for the development of Delhi according to the plan and for matters ancillary thereto. 'Amenity', as provided in Section 2(a), includes road, water supply, street lighting, drainage, sewerage, public works etc. 'Building', as provided in Section 2(b), includes any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection which is intended to be used for residential, industrial, commercial or other purposes, whether in actual use or not. The obligation to prepare a Master Plan is contained in Section 7 of the DD Act. The Master Plan is required to define the various zones into which Delhi may be divided for the purposes of development and indicate the manner in which the land in each zone is proposed to be used. The preparation of the zonal development plans has been provided for in Section 8. The said plans provide for the proposed land use. The Town Planners are supposed to examine various aspects before preparation of the Master Plan and Zonal Plan and providing the land use. The Act provides for a detailed procedure for modification of the Master Plan and the Zonal Development Plan (Section 11A). Section 14 forbids use of land in contravention of the plans. It provides that no person shall use or permit to be used any land or building otherwise than in conformity with plan in a zone. Section 29(2) is a penal provision, inter alia, providing for the penalty on any person who uses any land or building in contravention of Section 14. Section 31A is the power of the authority to seal unauthorized development.
22. The illegal industrialization in residential/non-conforming area commenced and has continued and the Authority, the Governments and its agencies have been totally negligent in discharge of its functions and obligations under the provisions of the DD Act.
23. Regarding the non-setting up of Industrial Estates in Delhi what the position was in 1990, when the second Master Plan was enforced, is apparent from the affidavit dated 2nd February, 2001 filed by the Commissioner (Planning), Delhi Development Authority. Dealing with the question of relocation of non-conforming industries and the setting up of the industrial estate in Delhi, that affidavit states :
"Master Plan for Delhi 2001 (MPD-2001), came in force on 1.8.1990, stipulates earmarking 6 to 7% of land in urban extension and thus the development of 16 new light industrial areas (1533 ha.) and another 263 ha. for extensive industrial area to be mainly utilized for shifting of existing incompatible industrial units. As per MPD-2001 in 1981 there were about 46,000 industrial units out of which 8000 were in non-conforming areas which were to be shifted. It was reassessed that about 24000 industrial units will require shifting and by 2001 the total number of industrial units will be around 93000. MPD-2001 clearly stipulates that the action for shifting of polluting industries is to be taken by Delhi Administration, as cited below :
'Action shall be taken by Delhi Administration to prepare a list of individual noxious and hazardous industrial units to be shifted and depending on the polluting/hazard, administration may force these industrial units to shift within a maximum prescribed period of 3 years.
24. It further stipulates the following policy guidelines :
The hazardous and noxious industrial units are not permitted in Delhi.
No new heavy and large industrial units shall be permitted in Delhi.
No new acid, chemical and paints and varnish industrial units to be permitted.
No new extensive industrial units shall be permitted except in existing identified extensive industrial areas. Existing non-conforming extensive industrial units shall be shifted to the extensive industrial use zone within a maximum period of 3 years after the allotment of plots by various Government Agencies.
Non-conforming light and service industrial units with 20 or more workers shall be shifted to the industrial use zones within a maximum period of 3 years after the allotment of plots and by providing necessary incentives by the various Government agencies in conforming use zones."
3. Delhi Administration vide Chief Secretary's letter dated 17.9.1991 addressed to Vice Chairman, Delhi Development Authority conveyed that 'it is now the established policy of the Delhi Administration not to develop any new industrial estates in the Union Territory of Delhi. All non-conforming light and extensive industrial units would have to close down/shift on their own to areas outside Delhi, as no more industrial areas are to be developed and (b) further, that in the additional 2% area being earmarked for service sectors/establishments industrial activities contained in Annexure III-A, III-B and III-C of the revised Master Plan would be promoted'."
25. The affidavit further states that the matter was placed before the Authority in its meeting dated 7th July, 1992 and the proposal of the Delhi Administration with certain conditions was approved. The DDA resolved that planning for industrial activity may continue as envisaged under the Master Plan of Delhi - 2001 at the rate of 6 to 7% of urban extension area. It further states that pending the said policy decision, no new industrial development was taken up and even the industrial area indicated in the development plan of Dwarka (181 hectare) was reverted to commercial and other land uses.
26. In the light of the aforesaid, when even industrial area is reverted to commercial and other land use, we fail to understand :
1. Why no action was taken to enforce the Master Plan and for stoppage of the functioning of the industries in the residential/non-conforming areas;
2. How the industries commenced and continued their illegal activity;
3. How can the State Government regularize the illegality even without existence and consideration of availability of infrastructure and in disregard to the rights of the residents on the ground of 70% concentration of industry in the concerned area(s).
27. Further, in the light of the letter of the Chief Secretary dated 17th September, 1991, it is not open to the State Government to argue that for want of acquisition of the land, the industrial estates could not be developed. They had themselves written to DDA not to develop any new industrial estate in the Union Territory of Delhi. Even existing industrial area, as above noted, was diverted. The State Government has been repeatedly taking time from the Court for the shifting of the offending industrial activity. If it was not the responsibility of the State Government to shift the industry, what was the purpose of filing IA 1206/99 seeking extension of time upto March 2004 and for seeking modification of the order dated 8th September, 1999 whereunder the industries were directed to be closed by 31st December, 1999. Even at the cost of repetition, we may again note that for the present, we are examining the aspect of shifting of industries which have come up after 31st December, 1989 in residential/non-conforming areas. The letter dated 17th September, 1991 also states that the MCD announced its ad hoc registration policy in 1989 with the prior approval of the Lt. Governor to grant ad hoc registration to units which had unauthorisedly established themselves in non-conforming areas till 31st December, 1989. In this situation, we see no reasons why those units which have come up after 31st December, 1989 shall not be closed and sternly dealt with. We are unable to find any equity in favour of such violators of law.
28. The regularization would also result in making the concept of NCR non- functional and inoperative.
29. The National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 (for short, the 'NCR Act') was enacted to provide for the constitution of a Planning Board for the preparation of a plan for the development of National Capital Region and for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of such plan and for evolving harmonized policies for the control of land uses and development of infrastructure in the National Capital Region so as to avoid any haphazard development of that region and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The areas within the National Capital Region are specified in the Schedule to the NCR Act. National Capital Region comprises the area of entire Delhi, certain districts of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan as provided in the Schedule. 'Regional Plan' as provided in Section 2(j) means the plan prepared under the NCR Act for development of the National Capital Region and for the control of land-uses and the development of infrastructure in the National Capital Region. What the Regional Plan shall contain is provided in Section 10. Section 10(2) provides that the Regional Plan shall indicate the manner in which the land in the National Capital Region shall be used, whether by carrying out development thereon or by conservation or otherwise, and such other matters as are likely to have any important influence on the development of the National Capital Region