MANU/SC/0288/2021
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
I.A. No. 85618 of 2020 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 838 of 2019
Decided On: 19.04.2021
Appellants: M.K. Ranjitsinh and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.A. Bobde, C.J.I., A.S. Bopanna and V. Ramasubramanian, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Shyam Divan, Prashanto Chandra Sen, Sr. Advs., Sonia Dube, Sugandha Yadav, Ria Singh Sawhney and Surbhi Anand, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: K.K. Venugopal, AG, Tushar Mehta, SG, Aishwarya Bhatia, ASG, Gurmeet Singh Makker, AOR, Ankur Talwar, Shyam Gopal, Chinmayee Chandra, Advs., Manish Singhvi, Sr. Adv., Arpit Parkash, Adv., Milind Kumar, AOR, K.V. Viswanathan, Sr. Adv., Manu Nair, Shashwant Kumar, Nawneet Vibhav, Shreya Mukherjee, Neelabh Shreesh, Naman Mittal, Advs., S.S. Shroff, Somesh Chandra Jha, AORs, Rahul Narang, Varun K. Chopra, Advs., for Vkc Law Offices, Arti Singh, AOR, Aakashdeep Singh Roda, Basant Pal Singh, Pooja Singh, Advs., Devendra Singh, AOR, Sameer Singh, Vijay K. Singh, Sahil Lochab, Neelam Singh, Advs., Sajan Poovayya, Sr. Adv., E.C. Agrawala, Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar, Deepanwita Priyanka, Hemantika Wahi, AORs, Ranji Thomas, Sr. Adv., V.N. Raghupathy, AOR, Pratishtha Vij, Adv., A. Karthik, Mrinal Gopal Elker, Mahfooz Ahsan Nazki and Sachin Patil, AORs
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Companies Act, 2013 - Section 135, Companies Act, 2013 - Section 166(2); Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 - Section 4, Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 - Section 5, Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act, 2016 - Section 6; Constitution of India - Article 21; Environment (protection) Act, 1986 - Section 2(a)
Cases Referred:
T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0122/2012; Centre for Environment Law, WWF-I v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0373/2013; M.C. Mehta v. Kamal Nath and Ors. MANU/SC/1007/1997
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER - ECOLOGICAL IMBALANCE:PROTECTION AND CONSERVATION OF FORESTS THROUGH-OUT THE COUNTRY, PROTECTION OF WILD LIFE, BAN ON FELLING OF TREES AND FALLING OF UNDER GROUND WATER LEVEL
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  1

Mentioned
  2

Case Note:
Environment - Protection birds on the verge of extinction - Great Indian Bustard (GIB) and the Lesser Florican - Whether corrective actions like checking on overhead power lines etc. can be implemented?

Facts:

The existence of overhead power lines stated to have become a hazard due to which the said species of birds on collision were getting killed. In the pending writ petition, application was filed seeking interim directions to R5, 6 and 9 to 11 to ensure predator proof fencing, controlled grazing in the enclosure development and to direct the said Respondents not to permit installation of overhead power lines and also not permit further construction of windmills and installation of solar infrastructure in priority and potential habitat as identified by the Wildlife Institute of India. The Petitioner also sought direction to the Respondents to install divertors for the powerlines which has been listed in the application.

Held, while disposing the Application:

i. There cannot be disagreement whatsoever that appropriate steps are required to be taken to protect the said species of birds. In that view, insofar as the existing overhead powerlines are concerned the Respondents shall take steps forthwith to install divertors and in respect of existing overhead powerlines all future cases of installing the transmission lines a study shall be conducted with regard to the feasibility for the lines to be laid underground. In all such cases where it is feasible, steps shall be taken to lay the transmission line underground. For the lines to be laid in future if as per the technical report the overhead line alone is feasible and the same is ratified by the Committee, in such event the installation of the divertors shall also be a condition attached in the contract to be entered with generating companies. [11]

ii.The Respondents No. 5, 6 and 9 to 11 while arranging to lay the powerlines underground in respect of the powerlines, the feasibility of which is not in doubt shall proceed with the work right away. However, in cases where the Respondents find that there are issues relating to feasibility, the matter shall be referred to the committee with all relevant material and particulars. The committee shall assess the matter and arrive at a conclusion as to whether the underground powerline is feasible or not. Based on the report to be rendered by the committee the further action shall be taken by the Respondent.[17]

iii.In all cases where the overhead powerlines exist as on today in the priority and potential GIB area the Respondents shall take steps forthwith to install divertors pending consideration of the conversion of the overhead cables into underground powerlines. In all such cases where it is found feasible to convert the overhead cables into underground powerlines the same shall be undertaken and completed within a period of one year and till such time the divertors shall be hung from the existing powerlines.[18]

ORDER
1. The writ petition is filed in the nature of public interest seeking to protect two species of birds namely the Great Indian Bustard ('GIB' for short) and the Lesser Florican, which is on the verge of extinction. The existence of overhead power lines is stated to have become a hazard due to which the said species of birds on collision are getting killed. In the pending writ petition, the application in I.A. No. 85618/2020 is filed seeking interim directions to direct the State of Rajasthan (Respondents No. 5 and 6) and State of Gujarat (Respondents No. 9 to 11) to ensure predator proof fencing, controlled grazing in the enclosure development and to direct the said Respondents not to permit installation of overhead power lines and also not permit further construction of windmills and installation of solar infrastructure in priority and potential habitat as identified by the Wildlife Institute of India. The Petitioner is also seeking a direction to the Respondents to install divertors for the powerlines which has been listed in the application.
2. The very subject matter indicates that though such directions are sought against the Respondents, the litigation is not adversarial in nature as it is community interest. In fact, the Petitioners being environmentalists, are seeking to protect the rare birds which are dwindling in number. It is contended that GIB is one of the heaviest flying birds in the world, about a meter in height and wing span of around seven feet. It has disappeared from 90 per cent of habitat except parts of Rajasthan and Gujarat which is to be protected. According to the Petitioners, overhead power lines are the biggest threat to the survival of the GIBs. The Wildlife Institute of India (WII) in its Report "Power Line Mitigation, 2018" has stated that every year 1 lakh birds die due to collision with power lines. The Report concluded that unless power line mortality is mitigated urgently, extinction of GIBs is certain. Surveys conducted by Wildlife Institute of India (WII) in Thar covering 80 km of power lines repeated 7 times over a year found 289 carcasses of around 30 species, including the Great Indian Bustard (GIB). The study estimated 3 bird mortalities/km/month for low-tension lines, 6 bird mortalities/km/month for high-tension lines, and about 1 lakh birds/per year within a 4200 sq.km area in/around Desert National Park, Rajasthan. In terms of GIB, 6 mortalities have been recorded in Thar during 2017-20, all due to high-tension transmission lines - some of them connected to wind turbine. Therefore, Petitioner seeks undergrounding all future overhead power lines; selected power lines in priority GIB habitat and installation of divertors in potential habitat.
3. In fact, it is admitted by the Ministry of Power, Union of India in their affidavit dated 15.03.2021 as follows:
The Great Indian Bustard ("GIB") lacks frontal vision. Due to this, they cannot detect powerlines ahead of them, from far. As they are heavy birds, they are unable to manoeuvre across power lines within close distances. Thus, they are vulnerable to collision with power lines. In case of low voltage lines, electrocution is often the cause of death due to smaller phase to phase separation distance. High voltage lines do not cause death due to electrocution but cause death due to collision.
4. But, this Court while considering IA Nos. 1433 and 1477 of 2005 in the case of T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0122/2012 : (2012) 3 SCC 277 has observed as hereunder:
17. Environmental justice could be achieved only if we drift away from the principle of anthropocentric to ecocentric. Many of our principles like sustainable development, polluter-pays principle, intergenerational equity have their roots in anthropocentric principles. Anthropocentrism is always human interest focussed and that non-human has only instrumental value to humans. In other words, humans take precedence and human responsibilities to non-human based benefits to humans. Ecocentrism is nature-centred where humans are part of nature and non-humans have intrinsic value. In other words, human interest does not take automatic precedence and humans have obligations to non-humans independently of human interest. Ecocentrism is therefore life-centred, nature-centred where nature includes both humans and non-humans. The National Wildlife Action Plan 2002-2012 and the Centrally Sponsored Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats Scheme, 2009 are centred on the principle of ecocentrism.