MANU/SC/2299/1995
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
W.P. (C) No. 13381/1984
Decided On: 17.11.1995
Appellants: M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI)
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Kuldip Singh and Saiyed Saghir Ahmad, JJ.
Subject: Miscellaneous
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER - NOISE POLLUTION : INDUSTRY, VEHICULAR
ORDER
1. Pursuant to this Court order dated August 4, 1995, Mr. K.N. Kondaiah, Joint Commissioner (Meat & Meet Products), Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India, New Delhi, has filed affidavit, the details of the Scheme under the Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Animal Husbandry, in regard to grants for slaughter houses has been explained. Thereafter in paragraph 6 it is stated as under:
"I state that the Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India has received a proposal from the Government of Uttar Pradesh, Urban Development Department (Anubhag-7), Vikas Bhavan, Lucknow, on 19.7.95 for establishment of (a) New Modern Slaughter House at a cost of Rs. 380 lakhs (including cost of land Rs. 60.00 lakhs) and (b) a carcass utilization centre at a cost of Rs. 3.45 lakhs i.e. Rs. 160 lakhs for slaughter houses on 50: 50 basis (excluding cost of land) and Rs. 185 lakhs for carcass utilization centre (rendering plant) on 100% basis". Thereafter in paragraph 7 it is stated that 9 points for clarifications have been referred to the Secretary to Government of U.P. Urban Development Department, Lucknow and as soon as the information is received by the Ministry, the matter shall be processed further. It is clear from the affidavit that in the Eighth Five Year Plan allocation of Rs. 2,946.15 lakhs is available for the construction of slaughter houses/carcass. It is further stated that several projects have been stalled because of the public resistance at various places. Be that as it may, the construction of slaughter house at Agra is most important for environmental protection, pollution control and tourism purposes. The Taj Mahal at Agra attracts large number of tourists every year. The city has to be kept clean and pollution free. We are of the view that the construction of slaughter house at Agra has to be taken up separately and with utmost urgency. Top priority should be given to this project. We, therefore, suggest that the construction of slaughter house at Agra be de-linked from the Scheme and total cost of the construction of this project should be met from the Eighth Five Year Plan allocation of Rs. 2,946.15 lakhs. We, therefore, direct the Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry Dairying, Ministry of Agriculture, Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, Government of India, to depute a responsible officer from their respective Departments to be present in this Court on December 8, 1995 at 2. p.m. to assist this Court to sort out the difficulties which are coming in the way of the Agra - Slaughter House Project. We further direct the Commissioner, Agra division, Administrator, Nagar Nigam, Agra and Secretary to Government of U.P., Urban Development Department, Lucknow, to be present in this Court on the same date and time.
I.A. No. 27 of 1995 Mr. Mehta has invited our attention to the Ten Point Initiative sponsored by Mr. Satish Sharma under the caption "A Green Project". The first point is regarding LPG for all. It is stated that the waiting list consisting of over one lakh of LPG consumers in Agra shall be wiped out by March 31, 1996. We would like to know as to what is the waiting list as at present and whether it would be possible to exhaust the list by December 31, 1995.
2. The next point is regarding unleaded/low lead petrol. It is stated that retail outlets for unleaded petrol would be complete by April, 1996, on the Delhi-Agra High way and the Scheme would also be introduced in Taj Trapezium by September, 1995. An affidavit be filed indicating the progress in this respect.
Mathura Oil Refinery
3. So far as intensification of Environment Management by Mathura Refinery is concerned, we direct the Refinery to file affidavit indicating the status in this respect. The refinery shall also indicate after consulting the Ministry of Petroleum and the Gas Authority of India (GAIL), the progress in respect of the pipe line which is being constructed for bringing gas upto the door step of the refinery. So far as natural gas to industries in the Trapezium is concerned, it is stated that six lakh cubic meters of natural gas per day has been allocated for supply through pipe lines to the industrial units in the region. The progress of the laying of the pipe lines for the proposed gas distribution project may also be indicated.
CNG PROJECT
4. The Mathura Refinery may file status report regarding the progress made in the setting up of 'Hydro-cracker' unit. The copies of this order be sent to the Ministry of Petroleum and Mathura Refinery. M/s. Devi Sahai Glass Works, Firozabad & M/s. Talwar Glass Works.
5. We have been taken through the report place on record by the Central Pollution Control Board regarding M/s. Devi Sahai Glass works, Firozabad. The Board has made certain suggestions, Mr. Mehta, Learned counsel states that the suggestions made by the Board shall be complied with. As and when all the suggestions given by the Board are complied with, the industry may approach the Central pollution Control Board for inspection of the industry. In our order dated 29.9.95, the names of the three industries viz., M/s. Muslim Glass works, Circular Road, Firozabad (U.P.), India Glass Works, Firozabad (U.P.) & M/s. Mathur Glass Works, Ashfabad Road, Firozabad (U.P.) have been mentioned. M/s. Prem Glass was unintentionally omitted. The same may be deemed to be included in the said list.
© Manupatra Information Solutions Pvt. Ltd.