MANU/SC/1123/1997
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
I.A. No. 29 in W.P. (C) No. 4677 of 1985
Decided On: 11.10.1996
Appellants: M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Kuldip Singh, N.P. Singh and Saiyed Saghir Ahmad, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Party in person and Seema Midha, Arun Jaitley, Swaraj Kaushal, Harish Salve, Anil B. Divan, Gopal Subramanium, N.N. Goswami, S.B. Sanyal, Ms. Sheil Sethi, D.N. Goburdhan, Geeta Luthra, Saharaya and Co. R.K. Maheshwari, R.S. Suri, Hemantika Wahi, S. Sukumaran, R. Karanjawala, Ravinder Narain, Sumeet Kachwaha, Punit Singh, Bimal Ray, Ramji Srinivasan, J.B. Dadachanji, Tara Chandra Sharma, Sushma Suri, Ranjan Mukherjee, Ramesh Babu, M.R. Advs
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 47, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3(3)
Relevant Section:
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - Section 3
Cases Referred:
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/0175/1997; A.D.M. v. Shivakant Shukla MANU/SC/0062/1976; Jolly George Varghese case MANU/SC/0014/1980; Gramophone Company's case MANU/SC/0187/1984; Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0111/1986
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  3

Mentioned
  3

Case Note:
Environment - Pollution - Court by order directed that no construction of any type shall be permitted now onwards within 5 km radius of the Badkhal Lake and Surajkund and all open areas shall be converted into green belts - Hence, this Petition - Whether, order passed by Court could be confirmed - Held, 1. No construction of any type should be permitted, now onwards, within green belt area as shown in Ex. A and Ex. B - Environment and ecology of this area should be protected and preserved by all concerned - A very small area may be permitted, if it was of utmost necessity, for recreational and tourism purposes - 2. No construction of any type should be permitted, now onwards, in areas outside green belt upto one km. radius of Badkhal lake and Surajkund 3. All constructions which were permitted under directions 1 and 2 above should had clearance of "The Authority", Central Pollution Control Board and Haryana Pollution Control Board before 'occupation certificates' were issued in respect of these buildings by authorities concerned - 4. All development schemes, and plans for all types of constructions relating to all types of buildings in area from one km. to 5 km radius of Badkhal lake and Surajkund should had prior approval of Central Pollution Control Board and Haryana Pollution Control Board.
Ratio Decidendi:
"The Precautionary Principle" makes it mandatory for the State Government to anticipate, prevent and attack the causes of environment degradation.
JUDGMENT
1. This Court by the order dated May 10, 1996 in I.A. 29 [W.P.(C)No. 4677/85] dealt with the question whether - to preserve environment and control pollution - mining operations should be stopped within the radius of 5 kms. from the tourist resorts of Badkhal lake and Surajkund in the State of Haryana. The Court gave five directions in the said order. Direction 4 is in the following terms:
We further direct that no construction of any type shall be permitted now onwards within 5 km radius of the Badkhal Lake and Surajkund. All open areas shall be converted into green belts.
The Haryana Pollution Control Board (the Board) has notified the ambient Air quality Standards by the notification dated April 11, 1994. The notification fixes limiting standards of pollution in respect of sensitive areas, industrial areas and residential areas. The standards for sensitive areas are stringent than the standards prescribed for industrial and residential areas. The Board has recommended that the area of 5 kms. around the periphery of a center of tourism be notified as "sensitive area". With a view to control pollution and save environment in the vicinity of Badkhal and Surajkund, the above quoted direction was issued.
2. The Municipal Corporation Faridabad, Haryana Urban Development Authority and builders having interest in the area have approached this Court for modification/clarification of the above quoted direction. It is contended by learned Counsel appearing for the parties that in the said area of 5 kms. buildings are under construction, plots have been allotted/sold under various Development-schemes and the plot-holders have even started construction. According to the learned Counsel vested rights of several persons are likely to be adversely affected causing huge financial loss to them,
3. Although the direction specifically says "no construction... now onwards..." and as such the areas which are already under construction would obviously be excluded from the direction but in order to allay the apprehensions of the property-owners in the area, we are of the view that it is necessary to clarify the above direction.
4. Mr. Kapil Sibal, appearing for the Municipal Corporation Faridabad has taken lot of pains in having the area surveyed and plans prepared with a view to find out as to how best the direction of this Court regarding development of 200 mts. green belt at one km. radius all around the boundaries of the two lakes can be implemented. Mr. Sibal and Mr. Harish Salve have placed on record two plans showing the proposed green belts around Badkhal lake and Surajkund. The Plan in respect of Badkhal is marked Ex. A. Along with the Plan the detail of the Khasra Nos. on which the green belt is to be developed, has been given which is marked as Ex. A/1. Similarly, the plan regarding Surajkund is marked as Ex. B and the detail of the khasra Nos. is marked as Ex. B/l. It is agreed by all the parties that the green belt as proposed in Ex. A and Ex. B shall be developed in the two areas.
5. This Court by the order dated September 13, 1996 in LA. 18 [W.P. (C)No. 4677/85] has directed the Central Government to constitute an authority (The Authority) under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The said authority shall have the jurisdiction over the National Capital Region as defined under the National Capital Region Planning Act, 1955. It is thus obvious that the area of Badkhal and Surajkund, with which we are concerned, comes within the jurisdiction of the said authority.
6. Mr. Shanti Bhushan, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for some of the builders has vehemently contended that banning construction within one km. radius from Badkhal and Surajkund is arbitrary. According to him it is not based on technical reasons. He has referred to the directions issued by the Government of India under the Environment Protection Act and has contended that the construction can at the most be banned within 200 to 500 metres as was done by the Government of India in the coastal areas. He has also contended that restriction on construction only in the areas surrounding Surajkund and Badkhal lakes is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India as it is not being extended to other lakes in the country. We do not agree with Mr. Shanti Bhushan. The functioning of eco-systems and the status of environment cannot be the same in the country. Preventive measures have to be taken keeping in view the carrying capacity of the eco-systems operating in the environmental surroundings under consideration. Badkhal and Surajkund Lakes are popular tourist resorts almost next door to the capital city of Delhi. We have on record the Inspection Report in respect of these lakes by the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) dated April 20, 1996 indicating the surroundings, geological features, land use and soil types and archaeological significance of the areas surrounding the lakes. According to the report Surajkund lake impounds water from rain and natural springs. Badkhal lake is an impoundment formed due to the construction of an earthen dam. The catchment areas of these lakes are shown in a figure attached with the report. The land use and soil types as explained in the report show that the Badkhal lake and Surajkund are monsoon-fed water bodies. The natural drainage pattern of the surrounding hill areas feed these water bodies during rainy season. Large scale construction in the vicinity of these tourist resorts may disturb the rain water drains which in turn may badly affect the water level as well as the water quality of these water bodies. It may also cause disturbance to the aquifers which are the source of ground water. The hydrology of the area may also be disturbed.