MANU/SC/1806/2001
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
I.A. Nos. 1263, 1310 and 1311 in I.A. No. 22 in W.P. (C) No. 4677/1985
Decided On: 24.04.2001
Appellants: M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI)
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
G.B. Pattanaik, S.N. Phukan and B.N. Agrawal, JJ.
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Disposition:
Application Dismissed
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
JUDGMENT
1. I.A. 1263: This is an application by M/s. India Trading House indicating therein that the question of continuance of a hazardous industry does not arise inasmuch as no industry had been started, and therefore, the requirement of surrendering of land in his case would not arise. In view of the assertions made, notice had been issued by this Court, and to the said notice the Delhi Pollution Control Committee, Department of Environment has filed an affidavit-through the senior Environmental Engineer Dr. Chandra Prakash, which is copiously vague, and has not indicated as to how it can be said that there was a "H" Category industry on the premise in question. In the absence of any denial to the assertions made in the application filed, we have no other option than to hold that there is no industry on the premise in question, and therefore the judgment of this Court directing shifting of industry, and the consequently direction of surrendering the land would not arise in the applicant's case. The application is accordingly allowed. Needless to mention the applicant cannot be permitted to have any industry without proper environmental clearance.
2. I.A. 1310: The Bank is directed to file an affidavit indicating the Bank's dues against the entrepreneurs and what all properties have been kept in mortgage to find out whether it will be possible to clear all the dues by putting sale of other land in question. The Bank is further directed to indicate whether the Bank is going to have a one time settlement with the entrepreneurs.
3. The affidavit in question may be filed within 4 weeks from today.
4. Put up after Summer Vacation.
5. I.A. No. 1311: Heard, The I.A. is dismissed.
© Manupatra Information Solutions Pvt. Ltd.