MANU/SC/1616/2017
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
I.A. Nos. 93010 and 93007/2017 in Writ Petition (C) No. 4677 of 1985 (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
Decided On: 15.12.2017
Appellants: M.C. Mehta and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Madan B. Lokur and Deepak Gupta, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Party-in-Person, Huzefa Ahmadi, Sr. Adv., Rajnish Singh, Sudhir Nagar, Nikilesh Ramachandran, Dinesh Kumar Garg, Navdeep Jain, Niraj Jha, Rekha Chaudhary, K.K. Mohan and Minakshi Vij, Advs.
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 - Section 2(1), Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 - Section 3,
Cases Referred:
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/0488/2004 : (2004) 6 SCC 588; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/8028/2006 : (2006) 3 SCC 399; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India (2006) 3 SCC 429; Delhi Pradesh Citizens Council v. Union of India MANU/SC/8435/2006 : (2006) 6 SCC 305; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/8530/2006 : (2006) 7 SCC 456; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/1270/2013 : (2013) 16 SCC 336; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/0105/2012 : (2012) 11 SCC 759
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  6

Case Note:
Civil - Sealing order - Challenge thereto - Present case was related to unauthorized constructions and misuse of residential premises for industrial and other commercial purposes and to present possible misuse of residential premises for commercial (non-industrial) purposes - Whether in facts of present case, directions were necessary to be issued.

Facts:

Present Court has focussed on the illegal activities in several decisions and has issued directions from time to time to try and bring some sanity to urban living but to little or no effect. Present Court is required to consider applications filed by the applicants (Vishvjyoti Overseas (P) Ltd., Gitanjali Overseas (P) Ltd., Sumangal Promoters (P) Ltd. and Lakshya Construction (P) Ltd.). They had leased out their property to Infinity Knowledge Systems by a lease deed dated 27th December, 2006. Although the subject property was in a residential area, the lease was for commercial purposes thereby indicating the impunity with which orders passed by this Court were flouted by those who wanted to do so and the nature of protection enjoyed by them. In any event, when violation of the orders of this Court came to the knowledge of the Monitoring Committee, the subject property was sealed on 12th October, 2007. Apparently feeling aggrieved by the sealing of the subject property, Infinity Knowledge Systems moved applications in this Court for de-sealing it. On a report having been received from the Monitoring Committee, this Court passed an order on 13th November, 2007 permitting Infinity Knowledge Systems to continue in the subject property till 30th June, 2008 subject to deposit of conversion charges for the years 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 or from the date of occupation of the subject property whichever is later as penalty for misuse. Infinity Knowledge Systems was also required to file an undertaking that it would deposit the required charges. There is no dispute that conversion charges were paid by Infinity Knowledge Systems and the subject property was de-sealed on 14th January, 2008. Thereafter in view of the undertaking to stop misuse of the subject property, it was re-sealed on 1st July, 2008 and Infinity Knowledge Systems has vacated the subject property. Since then the subject property is said to be lying sealed.

Held, while issuing directions

1. Pursuant to the judgment and order dated 30th April, 2013 the subject applications have been filed for permission to appeal to the appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal against the sealing order. The applications were filed on or about 15th September, 2017 which is well beyond the 30 days grace period granted by this Court. [32]

2. It was submitted by learned Counsel for the applicants that, this Court has passed several orders permitting the institution of delayed appeals subject to payment of Rs. 1,00,000 towards costs. Therefore, the applicants may also be permitted to file an appeal which should be heard by the appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal on merits. The Applicants say that, they have already deposited Rs. 1,00,000 in the Registry of this Court. [33]

3. The applicants are keen to utilise the premises in question for residential purposes, as stated in their application. There is no apparent intention to utilise the premises in question for commercial purposes or for any purpose not permitted by law. That being the position, it would hardly serve any purpose, if the applicants are required to formally file an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal which is apparently already dealing with a very large number of appeals. It would, therefore, be in the fitness of things to de-seal the premises in question for residential purposes subject to certain conditions. [34]

4. As far as Infinity Knowledge Systems is concerned the following conditions would meet the ends of justice and also provide a safeguard against possible misuse of residential premises for commercial (non-industrial) purposes: (1) The applicants will file an affidavit before the Monitoring Committee stating that, they will use the premises in question only for residential purposes and for no other purpose whatsoever. The applicants will identify the persons for whose residential use the premises in question are sought to be de-sealed. Any change will be notified to the Monitoring Committee. (2) The affidavit filed by the applicants will state the name, address and other particulars of the person who will be responsible for any misuse of the premises in question, that is, for use of the premises in question for any purpose other than residential. (3) The person identified as the person responsible in terms of condition No. 2 above will also file an affidavit clearly stating therein that he or she will ensure that the premises in question are used only for residential purposes and that in the event the premises in question are used for any purpose other than residential, the deponent would be liable for contempt of this Court. (4) The applicants will file with the Monitoring Committee proof of payment of conversion charges to the statutory authority. (5) The affidavits will be filed before the Monitoring Committee who may impose such other further conditions as may be appropriate. [35]

5. In the event the Monitoring Committee is satisfied that, the premises in question ought to be de-sealed, it may require the concerned statutory authority to de-seal the premises in question. If the Monitoring Committee is not satisfied that the premises in question ought to be de-sealed, the applicants will be at liberty to approach this Court for appropriate orders. In view of Report No. 46 dated 12th November, 2007 this Order will not be applicable to all other commercial activities that have been sealed in the premises in question. [36]

6. It will not be necessary for any person whose residential premises have been sealed for misuse for any commercial (other than industrial) purposes at the instance of the Monitoring Committee to file an appeal before the appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal. Instead, that person can directly approach the Monitoring Committee for relief after depositing an amount of Rs. 1,00,000 with the Monitoring Committee which will keep an account of the amounts received by it. Any challenge to the decision of the Monitoring Committee will lie to present Court only. [37]

7. The Monitoring Committee has prepared a very large number of reports. The Monitoring Committee is requested to set up a website and place all reports, duly indexed, on the website so that they are available to the citizens of Delhi. [41]

JUDGMENT
Madan B. Lokur, J.
1. Invaders have pillaged Delhi for hundreds of years, but for the last couple of decades it is being ravaged by its own citizens and officials governing the capital city-we refer to unauthorized constructions and misuse of residential premises for industrial and other commercial purposes. This Court has focussed on these illegal activities in several decisions and has issued directions from time to time to try and bring some sanity to urban living but to little or no effect. The applications before us, the chronology of events and the historical developments leading up to these applications has given cause to reflect and decide on some of these issues keeping our constitutional obligations in mind.
Decision of 7th May, 2004
2. Way back in the 1990s it was brought to the notice of this Court that a variety of illegal activities were being carried on in the capital city of Delhi with reference to industries established in residential or non-conforming areas as well as misuse of residential premises for other commercial purposes. On an application having been moved, this Court realized that those in authority and power were not at all keen to take steps to remove hazardous and noxious industries and heavy and large industries out of Delhi, prohibit or prevent the continuing illegalities or even otherwise stop the misuse of residential premises for a commercial purpose. Since the attitude of the powers that be raised an issue of mis-governance or non-governance affecting the well-being of the citizens of Delhi, this Court felt that it could no longer be a mute spectator to the whims and fancies of those in power and authority. It was also felt that it would be necessary to direct those in authority and power to implement the law for the sake of the citizens of Delhi. This Court faced a situation where there was little or no support to the Rule of law by the concerned officials and today the citizens of Delhi are faced with and are witnessing, among other issues, outrageous levels of pollution in Delhi entirely due to the lack of concern for the Rule of law-the citizens of Delhi are paying a heavy price with hopelessly polluted air to breathe and consequent damage to their lungs, respiratory problems and possible damage to the brain of infants and children.
3. M.C. Mehta, an environmental activist, had already moved this Court with an application to find a remedy for the air pollution in Delhi in a pending writ petition. Although he sought several reliefs, this Court first concentrated on use of residential areas for industrial purposes and later, the misuse of residential premises for other commercial activities. For the present, we are concerned with the misuse of residential premises for other commercial activities. These issues first arose when preliminary orders were passed by this Court on his application on 30th September, 2002 and 19th August, 2003. Thereafter, this Court addressed the issue of residential areas being used for industrial purposes by a judgment and order dated 7th May, 2004 in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/0488/2004 : (2004) 6 SCC 588.
4. A reading of the judgment and order dated 7th May, 2004 makes it apparent that this Court expected all those concerned with governance of Delhi to adhere to the Rule of law and ensure its implementation. Unfortunately, this Court was anguished by events that demonstrated that the trust reposed was belied in terms of action for implementation of the law and that industrial activity continued in areas despite the Master Plan for Delhi, meaning thereby that impermissible industrial activity continued in residential areas in Delhi.
5. This Court also noted that no dispute was raised by the Government of India or the Delhi Government or by any statutory authority that unauthorised and illegal industrial activity had commenced and continued in Delhi in blatant breach of the provisions of the Master Plan and no action, or ineffective action, had been taken by the concerned authorities. Rather than put their respective houses in order, it was noted that a blame game had begun with the responsibility of taking action being shifted with each authority blaming one another-be it the Government of India or the Delhi Government or the statutory authorities. Tragically, the situation continues even today and those who are suffering are the citizens of Delhi, the sufferance being not only confined to breathing hazardous and noxious air but also the health of thousands of people including children and infants residing in Delhi. In other words, the consequences of the failure to implement the Rule of law in Delhi were having a generational impact, which cannot be anything but disastrous.
6. This Court noted that according to the Delhi Government it is not the function of the State Government to implement the Master Plan. According to the Government of India it is not the implementing agency and this Court noted that the Government of India had taken a somersault in this regard. According to other statutory authorities in Delhi, they too avoided shouldering any responsibility for inaction. Each of these authorities of the State was shifting their stands, as convenient, without any regard for statutory provisions and in blatant breach of the Rule of law. This Court darkly hinted that in all this there was connivance with industry for extraneous considerations.
7. Accordingly, this Court felt it appropriate to appoint a Monitoring Committee to oversee and ensure compliance with the directions given by this Court in its decision of 7th May, 2004 with regard to industrial activity in residential or non-conforming areas in Delhi.
Decision of 16th February, 2006
8. In a subsequent decision dated 16th February, 2006 in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/8028/2006 : (2006) 3 SCC 399 this Court again noted flagrant violations of various laws including municipal laws, the Master Plan and other plans besides environmental laws that had been engaging the attention of this Court for several years. It was noted that several orders were passed from time to time only to secure implementation of the laws and to protect the fundamental rights of citizens since it was the constitutional duty of this Court.
9. This Court also considered an extremely pertinent issue: what would happen when those entrusted by law to protect the rights of the citizens are themselves violators and/or abettors of the violations? The difficult task faced in such a situation was noted where, as a part of its constitutional duty, this Court is required to preserve the Rule of law so that people may not lose faith in it and also point out violations of the Rule of law by those who are supposed to implement the law. It was observed that the issue is not one of an absence of law but of its implementation.
10. Having passed orders on 7th May, 2004 relating to unauthorized industrial activity in Delhi and being compelled to set up a Monitoring Committee, this Court focused its attention on yet another problem facing the citizens of Delhi, namely, that of misuse of residential premises for commercial purposes. In the decision dated 16th February, 2006 in M.C. Mehta, this Court noted in paragraph 53 of the Report that it cannot remain a mute spectator when violations of the law affect the environment and the healthy living of those who abide by the law. It was stated, and the pain and anguish of this Court is quite apparent:
Despite its difficulty, this Court cannot remain a mute spectator when the violations also affect the environment and healthy living of law-abiders. The enormity of the problem which, to a great extent, is the doing of the authorities themselves, does not mean that a beginning should not be made to set things right. If the entire misuser cannot be stopped at one point of time because of its extensive nature, then it has to be stopped in a phased manner, beginning with major violators. There has to be a will to do it. We have hereinbefore noted in brief the orders made in the last so many years but it seems the same has had no effect on the authorities. The things cannot be permitted to go on in this manner forever. On one hand, various laws are enacted, master plans are prepared by expert planners, provision is made in the plans also to tackle the problem of existing unauthorised constructions and misusers and, on the other hand, such illegal activities go on unabated openly under the gaze of everyone, without having any respect and regard for law and other citizens.