MANU/SC/0080/1962
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petitions Nos. 90 to 112 of 1962
Decided On: 28.09.1962
Appellants:M.R. Balaji and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:State of Mysore
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
B.P. Sinha, C.J., J.C. Shah, K.C. Das Gupta, K.N. Wanchoo and P.B. Gajendragadkar, JJ.
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 12, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 15(1), Constitution Of India - Article 15(4), Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 16(4), Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 29, Constitution Of India - Article 29(2), Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 335, Constitution Of India - Article 338(3), Constitution Of India - Article 340, Constitution Of India - Article 340(1), Constitution Of India - Article 340(2), Constitution Of India - Article 340(3), Constitution Of India - Article 341, Constitution Of India - Article 341(2), Constitution Of India - Article 342(2), Constitution Of India - Article 366, Constitution Of India - Article 46
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 15(4)
Cases Referred:
The State of Madras vs. Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan MANU/SC/0007/1951; The General Manager, Southern Railway vs. Rangachari MANU/SC/0388/1961
Overruled / Reversed by:
R Chitrelekha v State of Mysore, MANU/SC/0030/1964; Indra Sawhney etc. etc Vs. Union of India and others, etc. etc., MANU/SC/0104/1993
Disposition:
Petition Allowed
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  4

Case Notes:
The case discussed over the reservation of seats for socially and educationally backward classes and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for admission to colleges- The scope of directive principles in the same- It was held that the Supreme Court could not fix the percentage for the same.
JUDGMENT
P.B. Gajendragadkar, J.
1. Since 1958 the State of Mysore has been endeavouring to make a special provision for the advancement of the socially and educationally backward classes of citizens in the State of Mysore under Article 15(4) of the Constitution, and every time when an order is passed in that behalf, its validity has been challenged by writ proceedings. Four previous orders passed in that behalf were challenged by writ proceedings taken against the State under Art. 226 in the High Court of Mysore. The present petitions filed by the respective petitioners under Art. 32 dispute the validity of the last order passed by the State of Mysore on the July 31, 1962, under Art. 15(4).
2. Out of the twenty-three petitioners, six had applied for admission to the Pre-professional Class in Medicine in the Medical Colleges affiliated either to the Mysore University or to the Karnatak University, and seventeen had applied for admission to the First Year of the 5 Year integrated course leading to the Degree of B.E. in the University of Mysore. According to the petitioners, but for the reservation made by the impugned order, they would have been entitled to the admission in the respective colleges for which they had applied. As a result of the reservation made by the said order, students who have secured less percentage of marks have been admitted, but not the petitioners. That, in brief, is the petitioners' grievance and they urge that the impugned order which has denied them the facility of admission in the respective colleges is void under Arts. 15(1) and 29(2) and should not be enforced against them. Accordingly, the petitioners pray that a writ of mandamus and/or any suitable writ or direction should be issued against respondent No. 1, the State of Mysore (hereinafter called the State), and the two Selection Committees which have been impleaded as respondents 2 & 3. The petitioners' case is that the impugned order which has been passed under Art. 15(4) is not valid because the basis adopted by the order in specifying and enumerating the socially and educationally backward classes of citizens in the State is unintelligible and irrational, and the classification made on the said basis is in consistent with and outside the provisions of Art. 15(4). It is also urged by them that the extent of reservation prescribed by the said order is so unreasonable and extravagant that the order, in law, is not justified by Art. 15(4) and, in substance, is a fraud on the power conferred by the said Article on the State.
3. These allegations are denied by the State and it is urged on its behalf that the classification made is both rational and intelligible and the reservation prescribed by the order is fully justified by Art. 15(4). The contention that the order is a colourable exercise if the State's power and amounts to a fraud on the Constitution is disputed.
4. As we have just indicated, the impugned order was preceded by four other orders and so, it is necessary to refer to the said orders in their sequence to understand the background of the dispute between the parties. On the 26 the July, 1958, the State issued an order that all the communities, excepting the Brahmin community, fell within the definition of educationally and socially Backward Classes and Scheduled Castes and Tribes, and provided for the said communities and tribes reservation of 75% of seats in educational institutions. For the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, the percentage of reservation was 15% and 3% respectively. This percentage for the Scheduled Castes & Tribes has been maintained in all the subsequent orders. The order issued by the State on the 26th July, 1958, was challenged before the Mysore High Court and it appears that the State conceded before the High Court that there was a drafting error in the Government Order and so, it did not press its case that the said order was valid. In the result, the writ petitions filed to challenge the validity of the order succeeded and the impugned order was quashed.
5. In 1959, two separate orders were passed by the State on the 14th May and 22nd July respectively. But the first order, all communities, excepting Brahmins, Baniyas and Kayasts among the Hindus and Muslims, Christians and Jains, were classified as socially and educationally Backward Classes. It appears that 65% of the seats were reserved for these socially and educationally Backward Classes and Scheduled Castes and Tribes. These orders were challenged before the Mysore High Court in the case of Ramakrishna Singh Ram Singh v. State of Mysore A.I.R. 1960 Mys 338. The High Court upheld the pleas raised by the petitioners and quashed the impugned orders. In the result, the High Court directed that the applications made by the petitioners for admission to the respective colleges should be considered without reference to the said orders, but subject to the reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes made therein.
6. The State then appointed a Committee called the Mysore Backward Classes Committee with Dr. R. Nagan Gowda as its Chairman, to investigate the problem and advise the Government as to the criteria which should be adopted in determining the educationally and socially Backward Classes, and the special provisions which should be made for their advancement. The Committee made an interim report, and in the light of the said report, the State passed an order on the 9th June, 1960 regulating admissions for that year into the professional and technical colleges. Broadly stated, the effect of this order was that 60% of the seats were left open for what may be conveniently described as the 'merit pool' available to candidates according to their merits. 40% were reserved for the 'reservation pool', 22% of which were reserved for the Backward Classes, 15% for the Scheduled Castes and 3% for the Scheduled Tribes. This order was also challenged before the Mysore High Court in S. A. Partha v. The State of Mysore A.I.R. 1961 Mys 220. It appears that, on the whole, the High Court did not feel satisfied that the scheme of the special provision made by the impugned order was invalid, but it thought that the allotment of seats under the provisions of the said order in favour of the other Backward Classes in excess of 22% reserved for them otherwise than by open competition amounted to an unreasonable restraint on the fundamental right of other citizens and, therefore, was invalid. Having reached this decision, the High Court indicated the manner in which the reservation in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes should be worked out so as to avoid a successful challenge under Arts. 15(1) and 29(2).
7. Thereafter, the Nagan Gowda Committee made its report in 1961 and in the light of the said report and the recommendations made therein, the State proceeded to make an order under Art. 15(4) on July 10, 1961. This Order begins with the observation that the Nagan Gowda Committee has come to the conclusion that in the present circumstances, the only practicable method of classifying the Backward Classes in the State is on the basis of castes and communities, and it has specified the criteria which should be adopted for determining the educational and social backwardness of the communities. The two criteria specified in the report are then set out. The order then expresses the State's concurrence with the proposal made by the Committee that the Backward Classes should be sub-divided into two categories-Backward and the More Backward, and it adopts the test laid down by the report in that behalf. This approach, according to the order, is realistic and practicable. On the question as to the communities which should be treated as backward, the State made some variations in the recommendations made by the Committee. It held that Lingayats, and Bhunts who formed part of Vokkaligas, should be treated as backward. In that connection, the State noticed the fact that the recommendation of the Committee in respect of the said two communities was not unanimous, and it observed that a large percentage of Lingayat population lives in rural areas and most of them are engaged in agriculture and manual labour and suffer from all the consequences of illiteracy and poverty. In regard to the Bhunts, the State thought that they could not be distinguished from the rest of the Vokkaligas. The order then adds that Satanis, Nayars and Zoreastrians whose average according to the educational test prescribed by the Committee was 7 per thousand of population (whereas that of Lingayats is 7. 1) need not be treated as backward. The order then examines the question as to the percentage which should be reserved, and it rejects the Committee's recommendation of reservation of 68% all-told on the ground that such a large percentage of reservation would not be in the larger interests of the State. That is why, according to the order, 48% was fixed as the total reservation in favour of the Backward Classes, the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes together; that means, 30% was reserved for the Backward Classes. Annexure I to this order gives a list of 81 Classes and 135 More Backward Classes.
8. On July 31, 1962, the State passed the impugned order which supersedes all previous orders made by the State under Art. 15(4) for reservation of the seats in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as well as the Backward Classes. Under this order, the Backward Classes are divided into two categories (1) Backward Classes and (2) More Backward Classes. The effect of this order is that it has fixed 50% as the quota for the reservation of seats for Other Backward Classes; 28% out of this is reserved for Backward Classes so-called and 22% for More Backward Classes. The reservation of 15% and 3% for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively continues to be the same. The result of this order is that 68% of the seats available for admission to the Engineering and Medical Colleges and to other technical institutions specified in the order passed on July 10, 1961 is reserved, and only 32% is available to the merits pool. In other words, the percentage of reservation to the extent of 68%, which, according to the order of July 10, 1961, would have been against the larger interests of the State, has, by the impugned order, been accepted. The petitioners contend that the classification made by this order is irrational and the reservation of 68% made by it is a fraud on Article 15(4).
9. The problem raised for our decision by the present petitions involves the consideration of sociological, social and economic factors, and so, before dealing with the contentions raised by the parties before us it is necessary to set out briefly the material which has been adduced before us. On January 29, 1953, the President appointed the Backward Classes Commission by virtue of the power conferred on him under Art. 340(1) of the Constitution. This Commission made its report on March 30, 1955. The Commission was required "to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India and the difficulties under which they labour, and to make recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove such difficulties and to improve their condition." [Art. 340(1)]. According to the Commission, the relevant factors to consider in classifying Backward Classes would be their traditional occupation or profession; the percentage of literacy or the general educational advancement made by them; the estimated population of the community, and the distribution of the various communities throughout the State or their concentration in certain areas. The Commission also thought that the social position which a community occupies in the caste hierarchy would also have to be considered, as well as its representation in Government service or in the industrial sphere. (p. 47). According to the Commission, the causes of educational backwardness amongst the educationally and socially backward communities were :-
1. Traditional apathy for education on account of social and environmental conditions or occupational handicaps.
2. Poverty and lack of educational institutions in rural areas.
3. Living in inaccessible areas.
4. Lack of adequate educational aids, such as free studentships, scholarships and monetary grants.
5. Lack of residential hostel facilities.
6. Unemployment amount the educated which acts as a damper on the desire of the members to educate their children; and
7. Defective educational system which does not train students for appropriate occupations and profession. (p. 107).
10. The Committee realised that, in substance, the problem of the Backward Classes is really the problem of Rural India (p. 55). It appears that having considered several criteria which may be relevant in determining which classes are backward, the Committee ultimately decided to treat the status of caste as an important factor in that behalf, and it is on that basis that it proceeded to make a list of Backward Communities which were specified in Volume II of the Report.
11. Dealing with the problem of university education, the Committee observed that the present rush of students to the Universities should be prevented in the larger interests of the country and that could be done only by training students in various occupations and professions at the secondary stage itself. But the Committee noticed that so long as University Degree qualification continues to be a pre-requisite to Government service, it was not easy to prevent the rush at the doors of the Universities, and so, the Committee proceeded to recommend that in all Science, Engineering, Medicine, Agriculture, Veterinary and other technical institutions, a reservation of 70% of the seats should be made for qualified students of Backward Classes till such time as accommodation can be provided for all students eligible for admission. (pp. 119 & 125).
12. That, in brief, is the nature of the material available from the Commission's Report.
13. It is, however, significant that the Chairman of the Commission who signed the Report, confestet to a feeling of grave dissatisfaction with the approach adopted in the Report in determining the question as to which communities could be regarded as backward under Art. 15(4). "My eyes were however opened," says the Chairman in his covering letter to the President, "to the dangers of suggesting remedies on caste basis when I discovered that it is going to have a most unhealthy effect on the Muslim and Christian sections of the nation," and he added that the said consciousness gave him a rude shock and drove him to the conclusion that the remedies suggested by the Commission were worse than the evil it was out to combat. According to the Chairman, "if we eschew the principle of caste, it would be possible to help the extremely poor and deserving from all communities. Care, however, being taken to give preference to those who come from the traditionally neglected social classes." Even though the Chairman thus expressed his distress in very strong language over the basis adopted by the Commission, he ultimately agreed to the proposal of the Commission for the reservation of seats for Backward Classes to the extent of 70 per cent.
14. The Report made by the Backward Classes Commission along with the Chairman's covering letter was considered by the Central Government in due course. The Central Government apparently did not feel satisfied about the approach adopted by the Commission in determining as to who should be treated as Backward Classes under Article 15(4). The Memorandum issued by the Government of India on the Report of the Commission points out that it cannot be denied that the caste system is the greatest hindrance in the way of our progress towards an egalitarian society, and the recognition of the specified castes as backward may serve to maintain and even perpetuate the existing distinctions on the basis of castes. Besides, the memorandum goes on to add that some of the tests applied by the Commission were more or less of an individual character, and even if they were accepted, they would encompass a large majority of the country's population. If the entire community, says the memorandum, barring a few exceptions, has thus to be regarded as backward, the really needy would be swamped by the multitude and hardly receive any special attention or adequate assistance, nor would such dispensation fulfil the conditions laid down in Art. 340 of the Constitution. The memorandum, therefore, emphasised that action on a systematic and elaborate basis can be proceeded with only after the necessary positive tests and criteria have been laid down for determining which classes or sections are really entitled to get special relief and assistance. To that end, further investigation was obviously indicated. Even so, instructions were issued by the Central Government to the State Governments requesting them to render every possible assistance and to give all reasonable facilities to the people who come within the category of Backward Classes in accordance with their existing lists and also to such others who in their opinion deserve to be considered as socially and educationally backward in the existing circumstances.
15. On April 24, 1962, the Central Government wrote to the Secretary of Education Department of the Government of Mysore on the subject of reservation of seats under Article 15(4). In this communication it was observed that the Central Government had considered the said question and was of opinion that a uniform policy should be followed all over the country at least in non-Government institutions. It was then added that the All-India Council for Technical Education had recommended that the reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other backward communities may be up to 25% with marginal adjustments not exceeding 10% in exceptional cases. The Central Government, therefore, suggested that in all non-Government institutions in the State, the reservations under Art. 15(4) should not in any case exceed 35%.
16. In this connection, it would be interesting to refer to the report made by the Commissioner for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 1959. In this Report, the Commissioner refers to the pilot survey made by the Dy. Registrar General of India at the request of the Government of India. This survey was made with the help of material collected at the time of 1951 Census with a view to find out whether occupations could be adopted as suitable basis for determining social and educational backwardness. A preliminary analysis of the data collected indicated that it would be possible to draw up a list of socially and educationally backward occupations on the basis of :-
(a) any non-agricultural occupations in any State in India in which 50% or more of the persons belong to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes; or
(b) any non-agricultural occupations in which literacy percentage of the persons depending thereon is less then 50% of the general literacy in the State.
17. In his Report, the Commissioner has adversely commented on the classification made by the State in the impugned order.
18. It now remains to consider the report made by the Nagan Gowda Committee appointed by the State. This Report proceeds on the basis that higher social status has generally been accorded on the basis of caste for centuries; and so, it takes the view that the low social position of any community is, therefore, mainly due to the caste system. According to the Report, there are ample reasons to conclude that social backwardness is based mainly on racial, tribal, caste and denominational differences, even though economic backwardness might have contributed to social backwardness. It would thus be clear that the Committee approached its problem of enumerating and classifying the socially and educationally backward communities on the basis that the social backwardness depends substantially on the caste to which the community belongs, though it recognised that economic condition may be a contributory factor. The classification made by the Committee and the enumeration of the backward communities which is adopted shows that the Committee virtually equated the classes with the castes. According to the Committee, the entire Lingayat community was socially forward, and that all sections of Vokkaligas, excluding Bhunts, were socially backward. With regard to the Muslims, the majority of the Committee agreed that the Muslim community as a whole should be classified as socially backward. The Committee further decided that amongst the backward communities two divisions should be made (i) the Backward and (ii) the More Backward. In making this distinction, the Committee applied one test. It enquired : "Was the standard of education in the community in question less than 50% of the State average ? If it was, the community should be regarded as more backward; if it was not, the community should be regarded as backward." As to the extent of reservation in educational institutions, the Committee's recommendation was that 28% should be reserved for backward and 22% for more backward. In other words, 50% should be reserved for the whole group of backward communities beside 15% and 3% which had already been reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively. That is how according to the Committee, 68% was carved out by reservation for the betterment of the Backward Classes and the Scheduled Castes and Tribes. It is on the basis of these recommendations that the Government proceeded to make its impugned order.