MANU/SC/8530/2006
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Civil) 4677 of 1985
Decided On: 29.09.2006
Appellants:M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent:Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Y.K. Sabharwal, C.J., C.K. Thakker and R.V. Raveendran, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: S. Prakash, Party-in-person in W.P. (C) No. 264/2006, Amar Singh, Party-in-person in W.P. (C) No. 464/2006 and Umesh Sehgal, Party-in-person in W.P. (C) No. 470/200 G.E. Vahanvati, S.G., A. Sharan, A.S.G., Ajay Siwach, A.A.G., Ranjit Kumar, (A.C.), R.F. Nariman, Mukul Rohatgi, Jagdeep Dhankar, Vijay Hansaria, Arun Jaitley and Indira Jaising, Sr. Advs., Mahender Rana, Rana Mukherjee, Siddharth Gautam, Goodwill Indeevar, Pradeep Kumar Bakshi, Rajat Navet, Madhur Yadav, Avijit Bhattacharjee, Aman Hingorani, Priya Hingorani, Advs. for Hingorani Associates, Shobha, Ashok Kumar Mahajan, Maninder Singh, Pratibha, M. Singh, Gaurav Sharma, Kirti Man Singh, Abhinav Mukherjee, S. Janani, Deepak Goel, Ajit S. Bhasme, Varun Thakur, Sanjay Goswami, Devadatt Kamat, Sandhya Goswami, Ashok Bhan, Kiran Bhardwaj, R.C. Khatiya, Anil Katiyar, V.K. Verma, Sheel Sethi, Pradeep Dahiya, Sandeep Sharma, M.C. Mehta, T.V. George, Vijay Panjwani, Sanjiv Sen, Praveen Swarup, V.B. Saharya, Advs. for Saharya & Co., Jasbir Singh Malik, S.K. Sabharwal, Mushtaq Ahmad, Bina Gupta, Amreeta Swarup, Pratap Venugopal, Surekha Raman, E. Venu Kumar, Advs. for K.J. John & Co., Somvir Singh Deswal, Shree Pal Singh, S.K. Bhattacharya, Arun Kumar Beriwal, Kunal Verma, Arjun Garg, B.V. Balaram Das, D.N. Goburdhan, Pinky Anand , S. Wasim A. Qadri, D.S. Mahra, Anoop Bambani and Madhumita Bhattacharjee, Advs Anil Aggarwal, Intervenor-in-Person in W.P. (C) No. 263/200
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Delhi Development Act, 1957 - Section 11A
Cases Referred:
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8028/2006
Disposition:
Disposed of
Citing Reference:

Relied On
  1

Case Note:
Civil - Residential premises - Commercial use - Mixed use policy - Section 5 of the Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 - In M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8028/2006, the plea of MCD that it has power to seal premises in case of misuse having been accepted, various directions were issued, which included giving of wide publicity for stoppage of misuse by the violators and the commencement of sealing process if the misuse was not stopped - Sealing process was to commence on 29 March 2006 in a phased manner - On 24 March 2006, time to stop misuse was extended up to 30 June 2006 subject to persons claiming benefit of extended time filing affidavit - Further directed that premises in respect of which affidavits were not filed the process of sealing shall commence with effect from 29 March 2006 -Monitoring Committee was also appointed to oversee the implementation of the law - On 28 March 2006, Notification issued by DDA modifying the Master Plan insofar as mixed use was concerned - On 20 May 2006, the Government of India issued a Notification placing a moratorium for a period of one year in respect of all notices issued by local authorities in respect of categories of unauthorized development - Central Government directed local authorities to give effect to provisions of the Act - Writ petitions filed challenging the constitutional validity of the impugned notification and the Act - Government seeks modification of Order dated 10 August 2006 in the light of the Notification - Whether pending the decision of the writ petitions, should the Court modify Order dated 10 August 2006 and decline prayer for stay of the Notification dated 7 September 2006 - Held, Legislature would lack competence to extend the time granted by this Court in the purported exercise of law making power - No equities in favour of those who gave undertakings to the Court and obtained the benefit of time otherwise their premises could have been sealed on 29 March 2006 - Pending serious challenge to the validity of the Act and the Notification such persons cannot be allowed to claim any benefit of the Notification - Applications and petitions disposed of - Directions issued
Ratio Decidendi:
Dignity and authority of the Court has to be protected not for any individual but for maintenance of the rule of law
JUDGMENT
Y.K. Sabharwal, C.J.
1. The city of Delhi is an example of a classical case, which, for the last number of years, has been a witness of flagrant violations of municipal laws, town planning laws and norms, master plan and environmental laws. It is borne out from various orders and judgments passed by this court and Delhi High Court, whether in a case of shifting of hazardous and polluting industries or providing cleaner fuel (CNG) or encroachment of public land and streets or massive unauthorized construction and misuser of properties. It is a common knowledge that these illegal activities are also one of the main sources of corruption.
2. The issue of commercial use of residential premises was decided by this Court by judgment dated 16th February, 2006 in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Ors.MANU/SC/8028/2006 : reported in AIR2006SC1325 . While reversing a Full Bench decision of Delhi High Court, the stand of Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) was accepted and it was held that the Commissioner of MCD is empowered to exercise power of sealing in case of misuse of any premises. The judgment also noted certain individual cases as also other residential properties being illegally used for commercial purposes. Besides noting orders passed by this Court, from time to time, in the last so many years which had no effect on the authorities, reference was also made to some of the orders passed by the High Court in last about 15 years. There was, however, no implementation. It was also observed that such large scale misuser cannot take place without the connivance of the officers who will have to show as to what effective steps were taken to stop the misuser but the issue of accountability of officers would be taken up after misuser is stopped at least on main roads. The misuser activities included big furnishing stores, galleries, sale of diamond and gold jewellery, sale of cars etc. While issuing directions for implementation of laws, it was noted that if the entire misuser cannot be stopped, at one point of time because of its extensive nature, a beginning has to be made in a phased manner by first taking sealing action against major violators. The cases of small shops opened in residential houses for catering day-to-day basic needs were left out for the present.
Thus, the plea of M.C.D. that it has power to seal premises in case of misuser having been accepted, various directions were issued. The directions included giving of wide publicity for stoppage of misuser by the violators on their own and the commencement of sealing process if the misuser is not stopped. The sealing process in a phased manner was to commence on 29th March, 2006.
3. On 24th March, 2006, considering the prayer of the traders, time to stop misuser was extended upto 30th June, 2006 subject to persons claiming benefit of extended time filing affidavit stating that (i) on or before 30th June, 2006, misuser shall be stopped and no further extension on any ground whatsoever shall be asked for, and (ii) giving an undertaking to the effect that violation of condition of not stopping the misuser by 30th June, 2006 would subject him/her to offence of perjury and contempt of court for violation of the order of the court. It was further directed that premises in respect of which affidavits are not filed the process of sealing shall commence with effect from 29th March, 2006. A Monitoring Committee was also appointed to oversee the implementation of the law, namely, sealing of the offending premises in letter and spirit of the court's directions. However, on 28th March, 2006, a Notification was issued by Delhi Development Authority (DDA) modifying Master Plan insofar as the chapter on mixed use is concerned.
4. The Union of India filed I.A. No. 1931, inter alia, praying that the local bodies be directed to complete the exercise of identification of mixed use of roads/streets in residential areas within a period of six months. An order was, therefore, passed on 28th April, 2006 permitting the Government to place detailed facts before the Monitoring Committee to find out if it is possible to give some relief to the traders. It was directed that the Monitoring Committee will examine the facts broadly from prima facie point of view to assist the Court and report if, in its view, some relief in regard to the ongoing sealing can be given in respect of some of the areas temporarily till the exercise as contemplated in the application was complete. The Monitoring Committee heard all concerned including Secretary of the Urban Development Ministry of Government of India and examined the matter and filed its report on 4th May, 2006. When the Application along with the report of the Monitoring Committee came up for consideration before this Court, the same was withdrawn by the Government of India on 11th May, 2006.
5. On 12th May, 2006, the Delhi Laws (Special Provision) Bill, 2006 was passed by Lok Sabha; Rajya Sabha passed it on 15th May, 2006 and on receipt of assent of the President on 19th May, 2006, it was notified the same day. On 20th May, 2006, the Government of India issued a Notification placing a moratorium for a period of one year in respect of all notices issued by local authorities in respect of categories of unauthorized development. In exercise of powers conferred by Section 5 of the Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 (22 of 2006), the Central Government directed local authorities to give effect to provisions of the said Act, namely,
1) the premises sealed by any local authority in pursuance of a judgment, order or decree of any court after the 1st day of January, 2006, shall be eligible to be restored, for a period of one year, with effect from 19th day of May, 2006, to the position as was obtaining as on 1st day of January, 2006.
2) All commercial establishments which are required to cease carrying out commercial activities at their premises by the 30th day of June, 2006, may continue such activities, as they were being carried out on the 1st day of January, 2006 for a period of one year, with effect from 19th day of May, 2006.
By the aforesaid Act and the notice dated 20th May, 2006, the Government purported to relieve the persons of the undertaking though given to this Court and also purported to issue directions for removal of seals though placed on the premises under the order of this Court.
6. On writ petitions being filed to declare the aforesaid Act unconstitutional, on 23rd May, 2006, notices returnable for 17th July, 2006 were directed to be issued to the respondents in the writ petition as well as on the Applications for stay. The matters were, however, taken up on 1st August, 2006, when the writ petitions were admitted and rule issued by the Court noting that serious challenge had been made to the constitutional validity of the Act.
7. The stay applications were considered on 10th August, 2001. In support of plea for grant of stay, it was contended on behalf of the petitioners that it is a unique statute which overrules, annuls and sets aside the decision of this Court dated 16th February, 2006 and other orders passed thereafter. In terms of Order made on 10th August, 2006 while not granting the complete stay of the impugned legislation, the aforenoted two directions were stayed. Considering, however, that those who had given undertaking may have been misled by directions contained in the notice dated 20th May, 2006, time to comply the same was extended upto 15th September, 2006. It was further directed that premises de-sealed pursuant to notice dated 20th May, 2006 shall have to be again sealed with effect from 16th September, 2006 in case misuser is not stopped by 15th September, 2006. Certain other directions were also issued on 10th August, 2006. After this Order, the Government withdrew the public notice that had been issued on 20th May, 2006 in respect of the undertakings and the premises that were sealed by the Court.
We may further note that on 21st July, 2006, public notices were issued by DDA in exercise of power under Section 11A of Delhi Development Act stating that it proposed further modifications in the Master Plan and inviting objections within 30 days from the date of publication of the notice, namely, 23rd July, 2006.
8. The aforesaid public notice was in respect of mixed use policy. Another public notice was also issued on the same date inviting objections to the proposal for regularization of constructions carried out in excess of the norms laid down by the notification dated 23rd July, 1998. According to the Government, public hearings on the aforesaid notice were conducted between 23rd August, 2006 and 3rd September, 2006. DDA recommended the amendment of the Master Plan on 5th September, 2006. The Master Plan was accordingly amended. On 7th September, 2006 and on 15th September, 2006 about 2002 patches/streets were notified for mixed use.
9. The constitutional validity of the Notification dated 7th September, 2006 is under challenge on various grounds in W.P.(C) Nos. 450, 464 and 470/2006. The challenge deserves to be examined in depth and, therefore, in these writ petitions, we issue Rule. Counter affidavit shall be filed by respondents within 4 weeks. The respondents are further directed to place before this Court material which was taken into consideration for arriving at the decision leading to the amendment of the Master Plan in terms of the Notification dated 7th September, 2006 and the consequential Notification dated 15th September, 2006.
10. Mr. Ranjit Kumar, senior advocate appearing as Amicus Curiae and other learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners as also petitioners appearing in person seek stay of the impugned Notification dated 7th September, 2006. The Government, on the other hand, seeks modification of Order dated 10th August, 2006 in the light of the said Notification.
11. In the writ petition of Mr. Omesh Sehgal, a former Chief Secretary of Delhi, one of the pleas raised is that inviting objections and grant of hearing was a farce since decision had already been made to amend Master Plan even before inviting objections and the hearing was a mere formality and further the modification of an already expired Master Plan is not permissible. It has been further submitted that if any interim relief is to be granted, it should be confined only to small shops.
12. The small shops are presently protected as noted in the M.C. Mehta (supra). Further, the Monitoring Committee classifying shops measuring 20 sq. meters as 'small shops' has recommended that the said shops be exempted from the purview of sealing operation in the residential areas. According to the Reports dated 14th September, 2006 and 27th September, 2006 of the Monitoring Committee, the shops falling in the category of small shops trading in the following items may be allowed in residential areas:
i. Vegetables/fruits/flowers;
ii. Bakery items/confectionery items;
iii. Kirana/General stores;
iv. Dairy products;
v. Stationery/Books/Gifts/Book binding;
vi. Photostat/Fax/STD/PCO;
vii. Cyber cafe/Call phone booths;
viii. LPG Booking office/Show room without LPG cylinders;
ix. Atta chakki;
x. Meat/Poultry and Fish shop;
xi. Pan shop;
xii. Barber shop/Hair dressing saloon/Beauty Parlour;
xiii. Laundry/Dry cleaning/ironing;
xiv. Sweet shops/Tea stall without sitting arrangements;
xv. Chemist shops;
xvi. Optical shops;
xvii. Tailoring shops;
xviii. Electrical/Electronic repair shop; and
xix. Photo studio
xx. Cable TV/DTH Operations
xxi. Hosiery/Readymade Garments/Cloth shops
xxii. ATM
In the report dated 14th September, 2006, the Monitoring Committee has also noted about the survey conducted by MCD on 185 notified roads to find out nature of activities of the commercial establishments on those roads. Broadly the activities of commercial establishments on these roads are of automobile showrooms; automobile workshops; branded showrooms; call centers; coaching institutes; business offices; building materials; godowns; tent houses; guest houses; jewellery shops; restaurants and iron & steel shops.
13. At this stage, the question to be considered is whether pending the decision of the writ petitions, should this Court modify Order dated 10th August, 2006 and decline prayer for stay of the Notification dated 7th September, 2006 or decline modification of the Order and stay the Notification or pass any other order having regard to the facts and circumstances of the entire situation. We have heard extensive submissions made by learned Counsel. Many of persons, who gave undertakings to remove the misuser by 30th June, 2006 have filed separate applications in view of the Notification dated 7th September, 2006 and in substance sought to be relieved of the undertakings so that they could continue commercial user. Likewise, those whose premises were sealed also seek issue of directions for the opening of the seals. The sealing was to commence on 29th March, 2006. However, in view of the undertakings, misuser was allowed to be continued upto 30th June, 2006. Despite the undertakings, the misuser has continued till date, as noted hereinbefore.
14. There cannot be any doubt that the Legislature would lack competence to extend the time granted by this Court in the purported exercise of law making power. That would be virtually exercising judicial functions. Such functions do not vest in the Legislature. In fact, those who gave undertakings are already in breach of the undertakings by not stopping misuser by 30th June, 2006. The dignity and authority of the Court has to be protected not for any individual but for maintenance of the rule of law. The fact that those who gave undertakings may have been misled in view of subsequent developments can only be a mitigating factor while considering the action to be taken for breach of the undertakings. Further, there are no equities in favour of those who gave undertakings to this Court and obtained the benefit of time otherwise their premises could have been sealed on 29th March, 2006 or soon thereafter. The nature of trade conducted by most of them who gave undertakings has been noted above. There is serious challenge to the validity of the Act and the Notification. Pending determination thereof, such persons cannot be allowed to claim any benefit of the Notification.