MANU/SC/0396/1987
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition No. 3727 of 1985
Decided On: 22.09.1987
Appellants: M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
E.S. Venkataramiah and K.N. Singh, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Party in perso
For Respondents/Defendant: B. Datta, R.A. Gunta, S.K. Dholakia, Miss Bina Gupta, B.P. Singh, S.R. Srivastava, Krishan Kumar, Vineet Kumar, R. Mohan, Mrs. Shobha Dixit, A. Sharan, D. Goburdhan, Mrs. G.S. Mishra, Paraieet Sinha, R.C. Verma, R.P. Singh and Ranjit Kumar, Advs. B.R.L. Iyengar, Adv.
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 252, Constitution Of India - Article 48-A, Constitution Of India - Article 51-A, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 15, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 2(a), Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3(2)(iv), Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 9; Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 16, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 17, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 2(j), Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 24, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 5
Relevant Section:
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 2
Case Note:
Environment - pollution - Sections 2, 16, 17 and 24 of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Sections 2, 3, 5, 9 and 15 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - public interest litigation filed for restraining respondents from discharging trade effluents in river Ganga till they put up necessary plant for treatment of same - Supreme Court observed that river Ganga is life line of our country and affects life, health and ecology of Indo-Gangetic Plain - it is our duty to prevent it from getting polluted - despite of various notices no steps for treating effluents taken by respondents - Supreme Court directed closure of those industries who failed to take minimum required for treatment of effluents.

Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER - WATER POLLUTION : INDUSTRIAL, DOMESTIC, SEWAGE, RIVERS AND SEA
ORDER
Authored By : E.S. Venkataramiah, K.N. Singh
E.S. Venkataramiah, J.
1. This is a public interest litigation. The petitioner who is an active social worker has filed this petition inter alia for the issue of a writ/order/direction in the nature of mandamus to the respondents other than Respondents 1 and 7 to 9 restraining them from letting out the trade effluents into the river Ganga till such time they put up necessary treatment plants for treating the trade effluents in order to arrest the pollution of water in the said river. Respondent 1 is the Union of India, Respondent 7 is the Chairman of the Central Board for Prevention and Control of Pollution, Respondent 8 is the Chairman, Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board and Respondent 9 is the Indian Standards Institute.
2. Water is the most important of the elements of the nature. River valleys are the cradles of civilization from the beginning of the world. Aryan civilization grew around the towns and villages on the banks of the river Ganga. Varanasi which is one of the cities on the banks of the river Ganga is considered to be one of the oldest human settlements in the world. It is the popular belief that the river Ganga is the purifier of all but we are now led to the situation that action has to be taken to prevent the pollution of the water of the river Ganga since we have reached a stage that any further pollution of the river water is likely to lead to a catastrophe. There are today large towns inhabited by millions of people on the banks of the river Ganga. There are also large industries on its banks. Sewage of the towns and cities on the banks of the river and the trade effluents of the factories and other industries are continuously being discharged into the river. It is the complaint of the petitioner that neither the Government nor the people are giving adequate attention to stop the pollution of the river Ganga. Steps have, therefore, to be taken for the purpose of protecting the cleanliness of the stream in the river Ganga, which is in fact the life sustainer of a large part of the northern India.
3. When this petition came up for preliminary hearing, the Court directed the issue of notice under O.I.R. 8 of the CPC treating this case as a representative action by publishing the gist of the petition in the newspapers in circulation in northern India and calling upon all the industrialists and the municipal corporations and the town municipal councils having jurisdiction over the areas through which the river Ganga flows to appear before the Court and to show cause as to why directions should not be issued to them as prayed by the petitioner asking them not to allow the trade effluents and the sewage into the river Ganga without appropriately treating them before discharging them into the river. Pursuant to the said notice a large number of industrialists and local bodies have entered appearance before the Court. Some of them have filed counter-affidavits explaining the steps taken by them for treating the trade effluents before discharging them into the river. When the above case came up for consideration before the Court on the last date of hearing we directed that the case against the tanneries at Jajmau area near Kanpur would be taken up for hearing first. Respondents 14 to 87 and 89 are the tanneries near Kanpur. Of them respondents 16 to 32, 34 to 36, 43, 47, 51, 52, 54, 55, 57, 58, 60 to 62, 64, 67 to 69, 72, 74, 75, 77 to 82, 85, 87 and 89 are represented by counsel. The remaining tanneries did not appear before the Court at the time of the hearing nor were they represented by any counsel.
4. Before proceeding to consider the facts of this case it is necessary to state a few words about the importance of and need for protecting our environment. Article 48-A of the Constitution provides that the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the country. Article 51-A of the Constitution imposes as one of the fundamental duties on every citizen the duty to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have compassion for living creatures. The proclamation adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment which took place at Stockholm from 5th to 16th of June, 1972 and in which the Indian delegation led by the Prime Minister of India took a leading role runs thus:
1. Man is both creature and molder of his environment which gives him physical sustenance and affords him the opportunity for intellectual, moral, social and spiritual growth. In the long and tortuous evolution of the human race on this planet a stage has been reached when through the rapid acceleration of science and technology, man has acquired the power, to transform his environment in countless ways and on an unprecedented scale. Both aspects of man's environment, the natural and the man made, are essential to his well being and to the enjoyment of basic human rights - Even the right to life itself.
2. The protection and improvement of the human environment is a major issue which affects the well-being of peoples and economic development throughout the world, it is the urgent desire of the peoples of the whole world and the duty of all Governments.
3. Man has constantly to sum up experience and go on discovering, inventing, creating and advancing. In our time man's capability to transform his surroundings, if used wisely, can bring to all peoples the benefits of development and the opportunity to enhance the quality of life. Wrongly or heedlessly applied, the same power can do incalculable harm to human beings and the human environment. We see around us growing evidence of man-made harm in many regions of the earth; dangerous levels of pollution in water, air, earth and living beings; major and undesirable disturbances to the ecological balance of the biosphere; destruction and depletion of irreplaceable resources; and gross deficiencies harmful to the physical, mental and social health of man, in the man-made environment; particularly in the living and working environment.
A point has been reached in history when we must shape our actions throughout the world with a more prudent care for their environmental consequences. Through ignorance or indifference we can do massive and irreversible harm to the earthly environment on which our life and well-being depend. Conversely, through fuller, knowledge and wiser action, we can achieve for ourselves and our posterity a better life in an environment more in keeping with human needs and hopes. There are broad vistas for the enhancement of environmental quality and the creation of a good life. What is needed is an enthusiastic but calm state of mind and intense but orderly work. For the purpose of attaining freedom in the world of nature man must use knowledge to build in collaboration with nature a better environment. To defend and improve the human environment for present and future generations has become an imperative goal for mankind a goal to be pursued together with, and in harmony with, the established and fundamental goals of peace and of world-wide economic and social development.