MANU/SC/1430/2002
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 13029 of 1985
Decided On: 05.04.2002
Appellants: M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
B.N. Kirpal, V.N. Khare and Ashok Bhan, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Harish Salve, Solicitor General, (A.C), Mukul Rohatgi, Additional Solicitor General, Rakesh Dwivedi, T.R. Andhyarujina, Sr. Adv., Uday Umesh Lalit, (AC) Ms. Aparajit Singh, Siddhartha Chowdhury, M.C. Mehta
For Respondents/Defendant: Sushil Kumar Jain, Ajay Choudhary, Sanjay Bansal, Gopal K. Bansal, Vineet Jhanji, Shyel Trehan, Ms. Indu Malhotra, S. Wasim, A. Quadri, Abhishek Choudhary, D.S. Mahra, A.D.N. Rao, Y.P. Mahajan, B.V. Balaram Das, Percy Gandhi, R.N. Karanjawala, Ms. Nandini Gore, Ms. Pooja Gautam, Ms. Manik Karanjawala, S.K. Puri, Ujjwal Banerjee, Ms. Anindita Gupta, H.K. Puri, Siddharth Yadav, Ms. Anupama Grover, Rakesh K. Sharma, Narender Verma, Vishal Gupte, Sanjeev K. Kapoor, Sanjay Pathak, Anil Kumar Mittal, Prashant Bhushan, Joseph Pookkatt, Prasenjit Keswani, Prashant Kumar, Dhruv Mehta, Ms. Anu Mehta, S. Wasim A. Qadri, Bipul Kumar, D.S. Mahra, Ms. A. Subhashini, Ms. Sheil Sethi, Vijay Panjwani, Sri Narain, Sandeep Narain, Ms. Anjali, Ms. Rani Chhabra, V.B. Saharya, Rakesh Kumar Khanna, Reetesh Singh and Surya Kant, Adv.
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3
Cases Referred:
Residents' Welfare Association and Ors. v. State of Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0728/1998 : (1999) 1 SCC 161; Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0686/1996 : (1996) 5 SCC 647
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  1

Mentioned
  1

Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER - AIR POLLUTION MATTERS, I.E. INDUSTRIAL, VEHICULAR, POWER STATIONS ETC.
ORDER
1. Articles 39, 47 and 48-A by themselves and collectively cast a duty on the State to secure the health of the people, improve public health and protect and improve the environment. It was by reason of the lack of effort on the part of the enforcement agencies, notwithstanding adequate laws being in place, that this Court has been concerned with the state of air pollution in the capital of this country. Lack of concern or effort on the part of various governmental agencies had resulted in spiraling pollution levels. The quality of air was steadily decreasing and no effective steps were being taken by the administration in this behalf.
2. It was by reason of the failure to discharge its constitutional obligations, and with a view to protect the health of the present and future generations, that this Court, for the first time, on 23rd September, 1986, directed the Delhi Administration to file an affidavit specifying steps taken by it for controlling pollution emission of smoke, noise, etc. from vehicles plying in Delhi.
3. The concern of this Court in passing various orders since 1986 has only been one, namely, to protect the health of the people of Delhi. It is only with this objective in mind that directions had been issued in an effort to persuade the governmental authorities to take such steps as would reduce the air pollution. It is as a result of intervention by this Court that the following measures were taken in controlling pollution to some extent.
(a) lowering of sulphur content in diesel. first to 0.50% and then to 0.05%;
(b) ensuring supply of only lead free petrol;
(c) requiring the fitting of catalytic converters;
(d) directing the supply of pre-mix 2T oil for lubrication of engines of two-wheelers and three-wheelers;
(e) directing the phasing out of grossly polluting old vehicles;
(f) directing the lowering of the benzene content in petrol; and
(g) ensuring that new vehicles, petrol and diesel, meet Euro-II standards by September. 2000.
It was during the course of these proceedings that the Bhure Lal Committee was established under Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
4. The Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority is a statutory authority constituted under Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, and its directions are final and binding on all persons and organisations concerned. This position has been reiterated by this Court in Sector 14 Residents' Welfare Association and Ors. v. State of Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0728/1998 : (1999) 1 SCC 161. It is this authority which had directed the phasing out of non-CNG buses. It is the Bhure Lal Committee which had also recommended the conversion to CNG mode and issued directions that non-CNG buses should be phased out.
5. It is the report of the Bhure Lal Committee which was accepted, and orders were passed by this Court on 28th July, 1998, fixing the time limit within which the switchover to CNG was to take place. It may be mentioned here that the need for finding an alternative fuel to diesel had been drawing the attention of this Court for quite some time. This is evident from the order dated 21st October, 1994. in which it was observed as follows:
On an earlier occasion when these matters came up before this Court it was suggested that to begin with of Government vehicles and public undertaking vehicles including public transport vehicles could be equipped with CNG cylinders with necessary modification In the vehicles to avoid pollution which is hazardous to the health of the people living in highly polluted cities like Delhi and the other metros in the country,
6. Again, in the order dated 28th March. 1995. and 9th February, 1996. long before the receipt of the Bhure Lal Committee report, there is a reference to conversion of government vehicles to CNG. as well as to the installation of CNG stations and kits. It is unfortunate that the efforts of the governmental authorities have not kept pace with the orders passed by this Court. For more than one year, under one pretext or the other, first the NCT of Delhi and then the Union of India have been seeking extension of time for conversion of commercial vehicles to CNG. While the anxiety of the Delhi Government, to give it the benefit of doubt, was to see that bus services in this city were not disrupted which was the reason that it had sought extensions of the time limit, the response of the Union of India In this regard is baffling, to say the least.
7. With a view that the disruption in bus services does not take place and unnecessary hardship is not caused, this Court has been extending the time with regard to the conversion of commercial vehicles. Time was first extended to 30th September, 2001. and then to 31st January. 2002. It is during the period January, 2001. to February. 2002. that action has been taken by the Union of India, which leaves us with no doubt that its intention, clearly, is to frustrate the orders passed by this Court with regard to conversion of commercial vehicles to CNG. The manner in which it has sought to achieve this object is to try and dis-credit CNG as the proper fuel and secondly, to represent to this Court that CNG is In short supply and, thirdly, delay the setting up of adequate dispensing stations.
8. In 2001. the Union of India hurriedly set up a committee headed by Mr. R.A. Mashelkar to give a report with regard to vehicular pollution. It was surprising that since 1986, the Union of India had not thought of setting up such a Committee until after 31st January. 2001, when an order was passed in which the apathy on the part of the Government in carrying out the orders of this Court was taken note of, and the authorities were required to comply with the orders passed. The composition of the Mashelkar Committee was such that none of its members was either a doctor, or an expert in public health. The said Committee submitted its report, which does not show any serious concern in protecting the health of the people. The committee recommended that emission norms should be laid down, and that the choice of the fuel should be left to the users. The Committee seemed to have overlooked the fact that such norms had been in place for a long time with hardly any compliance thereof. For Instance, the emission norms with regard to the quality of air and water have been statutorily provided for but despite this, prior to 1996, Delhi was the third most polluted city In the world. It will not be out of place to mention that there are various emission and other norms and Regulations which are In place, but are Invariably breached. The existence of building Regulations have not been able to control rampant unauthorised and illegal construction, Just as the existence of norms relating to effluents have not prevented pollution drain. Norms regarding quality of water and the various orders passed by this Court In another case have not been successful in adding any oxygen in the water, the BOD level being zero. Therefore, it is naive of the Mashelkar Committee to expect that merely laying down fresh emission norms will be effective or sufficient to check or control vehicular pollution.
9. One of the principles underlying environmental law is that of sustainable development. This principle requires such development to take place which is ecologically sustainable. The two essential features of sustainable development are
(a) the precautionary principle and
(b) the polluter pays principle.
10. The "precautionary principle" was elucidated thus by this Court in Vellore Citizens' Welfare Forum v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0686/1996 : (1996) 5 SCC 647, inter alia, as follows:
(1) the State Government and the statutory authorities must anticipate, prevent and attack the causes of environmental degradation.
(2) Where there are threats of serious and irreversible damage, lack of scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation.
(3) The "onus of proof" is on the actor or the developer to show that his action is environmentally benign.