MANU/SC/0416/2000
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
W.P. (C) No. 182 of 1996
Decided On: 12.05.2000
Appellants:M.C. Mehta
Vs.
Respondent:Kamal Nath and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Saiyed Saghir Ahmad and Doraiswamy Raju, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: M.C. Mehta, an Seema Midha, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: Altaf Ahmad,Additional Solicitor Gen. N.C. Kochhar, G.L. Sanghi, Sr. Advs., Naresh K. Sharma, N.S. Vashisht, Uday Kumar, Kapil Sharma, Enakshi Kulshrestha, Rajiv Dutta, Vijay Panjwani, Anish Garg, (in-person) for (Hotel Hilton), B.V. Balaram Das, Devendra Singh
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 21, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 22, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 31A, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 37, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 38, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 39, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 40, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 41, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 42, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 43, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 44, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 45, Air (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 46, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 142, Constitution Of India - Article 20, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 15, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 16, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 17; Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 24, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 25, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 26, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 32, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 33, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 33A, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 41, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 42, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 43, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 44, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 45, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 46, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 47, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 48, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 49, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 50, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 45A
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 21
Cases Referred:
Indian Council for Enviro Legal Action v. Union of India, MANU/SC/1112/1996; Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/0686/1996; Supreme Court Bar Association v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0291/1998; M.S. Ahlawat v. Union of India and Anr., MANU/SC/0687/1999
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  1

Dissented
  2

Mentioned
  1

Case Note:

(i) Environment - punishment and fine - Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - sine qua non for punishment of imprisonment and fine is fair trial in Competent Court - punishment of imprisonment or fine can be imposed only after person found guilty - accused held liable to pay damages - quantum of damages under process of being determined - Court directed notice to be issued to show cause why pollution fine be not imposed - fine cannot be imposed without finding whether person in question guilty of offence or not.

(ii) Civil wrong - Article 32 of Constitution of India - pollution is civil wrong - pollution is tort committed against community as whole - person guilty of causing pollution had to pay damages for restoration of environment and ecology - polluter had also to pay damages to those who suffered loss on account of his act - under Article 32 Apex Court can award damages - in addition to damages polluter can also be held liable to pay exemplary damages so that it may act as deterrent for others not to cause pollution in any manner.
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
JUDGMENT
Saiyed Saghir Ahmad, J.
1. This case, which was finally decided by this Court by its Judgment dated December 13, 1996, has been placed before us for determination of the quantum of pollution fine. It may be stated that the main case was disposed of with the following directions:
1. The public trust doctrine, as discussed by us in this judgment is a part of the law of the land.
2. The prior approval granted by the Government of India, Ministry of Environment and Forest by the letter dated November and the lease-deed dated April 11, 1994 in favour of the Motel are quashed. The lease granted to the Motel by the said lease-deed in respect of 27 bighas and 12 biswas of area, is cancelled and set aside. The Himachal Pradesh Government shall take over the area and restore it to its original-natural conditions.
3. The Motel shall pay compensation by way of cost for the restitution of the environment and ecology of the area. The pollution caused by various constructions made by the Motel in the river bed and the banks of the river Beas has to be removed and reversed. We direct NEERI through its Director to inspect the area, if necessary, and give an assessment of the cost which is likely to be incurred for reversing the damage caused by the Motel to the environment and ecology of the area. NEERI may take into consideration the report by the Board in this respect.
4. The Motel through its management shall show cause why pollution fine in addition be not imposed on the Motel.
5. The Motel shall construct a boundary wall at a distance of not more than 4 meters from the cluster of rooms (main building of the Motel) towards the river basin. The boundary wall shall be on the area of the Motel which is covered by the lease dated September 29,1981. The Motel shall not encroach/cover/utilise any part of the river basin. The boundary wall shall separate the Motel building from the river basin. The river bank and the river basin shall be left open for the public use.
6. The Motel shall not discharge untreated effluents into the river. We direct the Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board to inspect the pollution control devices/treatment plants set up by the Motel. If the effluent/waste discharged by the Motel is not conforming to the prescribed standards, action in accordance with law be taken against the Motel.
7. The Himachal Pradesh Pollution Control Board shall not permit the discharge of untreated effluent into river Beas. The Board shall inspect all the hotels/institutions/factories in Kullu-Manali area and in case any of them are discharging untreated effluent/waste into the river, the Board shall take action in accordance with law.
8. The Motel shall show cause on December 18, 1996 why pollution-fine and damages be not imposed as directed by us. NEERI shall send its report by December 17, 1996. To be listed on December 18,1996.
2. Pursuant to the above Order, notice was issued requiring the Motel to show-cause on two points; (i) why the Motel be not asked to pay compensation to reverse the degraded environment and (ii) why pollution fine, in addition, be not imposed.
3. Mr. G.L. Sanghi, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for M/s. Span Motel Private Ltd., has contended that though it is open to the Court, in proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution, to grant compensation to the victims whose Fundamental Rights might have been violated or who are the victims of an arbitrary executive action or victims of atrocious behavior of public authorities in violation of public duties cast upon them, it cannot impose any fine on those who are guilty of that action. He contended that the fine is a component of Criminal Jurisprudence and cannot be utilised in civil proceedings specially under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution either by this Court or the High Court as imposition of fine would be contrary to the provisions contained in Articles 20 and 21 of the Constitution. It is contended that fine can be imposed upon a person only if it is provided by a statute and gives jurisdiction to the Court to inflict or impose that fine after giving a fair trial to that person but in the absence of any statutory provision, a person cannot be penalised and no fine can be imposed upon him.
4. Mr. M.C. Mehta, who has been pursuing this case with the usual vigour and vehemence, has contended that if a person disturbs the ecological balance and tinkers with the natural conditions of rivers, forests, air and water, which are the gifts of nature, he would be guilty of violating not only the Fundamental Rights, guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution, but also be violating the fundamental duties to protect environment under Article 51A(g) which provides that it shall be the duty of every citizen to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to show compassion for living creatures.
5. The planet Earth which is inhabited by human beings and other living creatures, including animals and birds, has been so created as to cater to the basic needs of all the living creatures. Living creatures do not necessarily mean the human beings, the animals, the birds, the fish, the worms, the serpents, the hydras, but also the plants of different varieties, the creepers, the grass and the vast forests. They survive on fresh air, fresh water and the sacred soil. They constitute the essential elements for survival of "life" on this planet. The living creatures, including human beings, lived peacefully all along. But when the human beings started acting inhumanly, the era of distress began which in its wake brought new problems for survival.
6. The industrial revolution brought an awakening among the men inhabiting this Earth, that the Nature, with all its resources was not unlimited and forever renewable. The uncontrolled industrial development generating tonnes of industrial waste disturbed the ecological balance by polluting the air and water which in turn, had a devastating effect on the wildlife and, therefore, the early efforts to protect the environment related to the protection of wildlife. But then the two world wars, the first world war (1914-1918) and the second world war (1939 to 1945) during which atomic bombs were exploded resulting in the loss of thousands of lives and burning down of vast expanses of forests, made the man realise that if the environmental disturbances were not controlled, his own survival on this planet would become impossible. The United Nations, therefore, held a Conference on human environment at Stockholm in 1972. In the wake of the resolutions adopted at that Conference, different countries at different stages enacted laws to protect the deteriorating conditions of environment. Here in India, the Legislature enacted three Acts, namely, The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; the Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. It also enacted the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977. Under these Acts, Rules have been framed to give effect to the provisions thereof. They are : The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Rules, 1975; The Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Cess Rules, 1978; The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Rules, 1982; The Air (Prevention & Control of Pollution) (Union Territories) Rules, 1983; The Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986; The Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989; The Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989, The Chemical Accidents (Emergency Planning, Preparedness and Response) Rules, 1996 and hosts of other Rules and Notifications.
7. In addition to these Acts and Rules, there are, on the Statute Book, other Acts dealing, in a way, with the Environmental laws, for example, the Indian Forest Act, 1927; The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; The Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and the Rules framed under these Acts. Various States in India have also made their Environmental laws and rules for the protection of environment.
8. Apart from the above Statutes and the Rules made thereunder, Article 48A of the Constitution provides that the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the -forests and wildlife of the country. One of the fundamental duties of every citizen as set out in Article 51A(g) is to protect and improve the natural environment, including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures. These two Articles have to be considered in the light of Article 21 of the Constitution which provides that no person shall be deprived of his life and liberty except in accordance with the procedure established by law. Any disturbance of the basic environment elements, namely air, water and soil, which are necessary for "life", would be hazardous to "life" within the meaning of Article 21 of the Constitution.
9. In the matter of enforcement of rights under Article 21 of the Constitution, this Court, besides enforcing the provisions of the Acts referred to above, has also given effect to Fundamental Rights under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution and has held that if those rights are violated by disturbing the environment, it can award damages not only for the restoration of the ecological balance, but also for the victims who have suffered due to that disturbance. In order to protect the "life", in order to protect "environment" and in order to protect "air, water and soil" from pollution, this Court, through its various judgments has given effect to the rights available, to the citizens and persons alike, under Article 21 of the Constitution. The judgment for removal of hazardous and obnoxious industries from the residential areas, the directions for closure of certain hazardous industries, the directions for closure of slaughterhouse and its relocation, the various directions issued for the protection of the Ridge area in Delhi, the directions for setting up effluent treatment plants to the Industries located in Delhi, the directions to Tanneries etc., are all judgments which seek to protect environment.
10. In the matter of enforcement of Fundamental Rights under Article 21, under Public Law domain, the Court, in exercise of its powers under Article 32 of the Constitution, has awarded damages against those who have been responsible for disturbing the ecological balance either by running the industries or any other activity which has the effect of causing pollution in the environment. The Court while awarding damages also enforces the "POLLUTER PAYS PRINCIPLE" which is widely accepted as a means of paying for the cost of pollution and control. To put in other words, the wrongdoer, the polluter, is under an obligation to make good the damage caused to the environment.