MANU/SC/0159/1980
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petns. No. 865 and 147 of 1979, 641, 409, 783, 695, 690, 747, 4346 of 1979, 1860, 2389, 4115, 1365, 457, 869, 4311-12, 813, 2505, 1659, 3784-94, 2602-10, 4876-91, 4392-95, 4404, 1177 of 1980
Decided On: 11.11.1980
Appellants: Maru Ram and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J., P.N. Bhagwati, S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, V.R. Krishna Iyer and A.D. Koshal, JJ.
Subject: Criminal
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 1(2); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 401; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 432; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 432(1); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 433; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 433(a); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 433-A, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 433A; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 5; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 55; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 59; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 59(s); Constitution Of India - Article 13, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 161, Constitution Of India - Article 181, Constitution Of India - Article 20(1), Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 246, Constitution Of India - Article 246(2), Constitution Of India - Article 254, Constitution Of India - Article 254(2), Constitution Of India - Article 307(1), Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 366(10), Constitution Of India - Article 372(1), Constitution Of India - Article 41, Constitution Of India - Article 52, Constitution Of India - Article 72, Constitution Of India - Article 74; General Clauses Act 1897 - Section 3(60)(b), General Clauses Act 1897 - Section 3(8)(b); Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 295; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 121; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 132; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 302; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 303; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 396; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 55; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 57; Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 59(27)
Relevant Section:
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 302; Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 433; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 432; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 433
Cases Referred:
Gopal Vinayak Godse vs. The State of Maharashtra and Ors. MANU/SC/0156/1961; Sarat Chandra Rabha and Ors. vs. Khagendranath Nath and Ors. MANU/SC/0190/1960; Aswini Kumar Ghosh and Anr. vs. Arabinda Bose and Anr. MANU/SC/0022/1952; Sambha Ji Krishan Ji vs. State of Maharashtra MANU/SC/0162/1973; State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Ratan Singh and Ors. MANU/SC/0184/1976; Pakala Narayana Swami vs. Emperor MANU/PR/0001/1939; Baldeo and ors. vs. Emperor MANU/UP/0078/1940; Mrs. Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India (UOI) and Anr. MANU/SC/0133/1978; Sunil Batra vs. Delhi Administration and Ors. etc. MANU/SC/0184/1978; Charles Sobraj vs. Supdt. Central Jail, Tihar, New Delhi MANU/SC/0070/1978; Hiralal Mallick vs. The State of Bihar MANU/SC/0093/1977; Mohammad Giasuddin vs. State of Andhra Pradesh MANU/SC/0108/1977; Bachan Singh vs. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0055/1982; Boucher Pierre Andre vs. Superintendent, Central Jail, Tihar, New Delhi and Anr. MANU/SC/0113/1974; Samsher Singh vs. State of Punjab and Anr. MANU/SC/0073/1974; Abdul Rahman Bhadar Wahi vs. State of Jammu & Kashmir MANU/SC/0078/1970; E.P. Royappa vs. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. MANU/SC/0380/1973; V. Punnen Thomas vs. State of Kerala MANU/KE/0020/1969; Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs. International Airport Authority of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0048/1979
Cases Overruled/Reversed:
Emperor Vs. Biram Sardar, MANU/MH/0123/1940
Disposition:
In Favour of State
Authorities Referred:
Cooley's Constitutional Limitations
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  7

Mentioned
  9

Case Note:
Criminal - Constitutional validity of life imprisonment - Section 433 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - Appellant challenged vires of Section 433 which compels the prisoners to fourteen years of imprisonment - Contended that provisions of Section 433 A was constitutional anathema and penological atavism incompetent for parliament and violative of fundamental rights and reformatory goals - Further contended that provisions of Section 433 was violative of Articles 14, 20 (1), 72 and 161 - Section 433 was enacted to prevent premature release of convicts sentenced to life imprisonment for capital punishment - Section 433 does not violates Article 14 as it makes no distinction among the equals - Section 433 neither contravenes Article 20 (1) - The effect of granting pardon is not to interfere with judicial sentence but to truncate its execution power under Section 433A and powers under Article 72 and 561 may be similar but are not same - Two powers far from being identical cannot suffer vicissitudes of simple legislative processes - Thus Section 433 cannot be invalidated as violative of Articles 72 and 161 - held, Section 433 does not ultra vires the Constitution.
JUDGMENT
Authored By : V.R. Krishna Iyer, A.D. Koshal, S. Murtaza Fazal Ali
V.R. Krishna Iyer, J. (On behalf of himself and Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J. and P.N. Bhagwati, J.)
1. A procession of 'life convicts', well over two thousand strong, with more joining the march even as the arguments were on, has vicariously mobbed this Court, through their learned Counsel, carrying constitutional missiles in hand and demanding liberty beyond the bars. They challenge the vires of Section 433A of the Criminal Procedure Code (Procedure Code, for short) which compels 'caging' of two classes of prisoners, atleast for fourteen eternal infernal years, regardless of the benign remissions and compassionate concessions sanctioned by prison law and human justice. Their despair is best expressed in the bitter lines of Oscar Wilde. The Ballad of Reading Gaol:
I know not whether Laws be right,
Or whether Laws be wrong,
All that we know who lie in gaol
Is that the wall is strong;
And that each day is like a year.
A year whose days are long.
(Emphasis added)
But broken hearts cannot break prison walls. Since prisons are built with stones of law, the key to liberation too is in law's custody. So, counsel have piled up long and learned arguments punctuated with evocative rhetoric. But Judges themselves are prisoners of the law and are not free to free a prisoner save through the open sesame of Justice according to Law. Even so, there is a strange message for judges too in the rebellious words of Gandhiji's quasi-guru David Thoreau. Henry David Thoreau: Slavery in Massachusetts, 1854:
The law will never make men free; it is men who have got to make the law free. They are the lovers of law and order who observe the law when the government breaks it. The case of the petitioners is that Parliament has broken the law of the Constitution by enacting Section 433-A.
2. Now, the concrete question and the back-up facts. All the petitioners belong to one or other of two categories. They are either sentenced by court to imprisonment for life in cases where the conviction is for offences carrying death penalty as a graver alternative or are persons whom the court has actually sentenced to death which has since been commuted by the appropriate Governments under Section 433(a) of the Procedure Code to life imprisonment. The common factor binding together these two categories of 'lifers' (if we may use this vogue word, for brevity) is obvious. The offences are so serious that the Penal Code has prescribed 'death' as an alternative punishment although, in actual fact, judicial compassion or executive clemency has averted the lethal blow--but at a price, viz., prison tenancy for life.
3. Before the enactment of Section 433-A in 1978 these lifers' were treated, in the matter of remissions and release from jail, like others sentenced to life terms for lesser offences which do not carry death penalty as an either/or possibility. There are around 40 offences which carry a maximum sentence of life imprisonment without the extreme penalty of death as an alternative. The rules of remission and release were common for all prisoners, and most States had rules under the Prisons Act, 1894 or some had separate Acts providing for shortening of sentences or variants thereof, which enabled the life-sentencee, regardless of the offence which cast him into the prison, to get his exit visa long before the full span of his life had run out--often by about eight to ten or twelve years, sometimes even earlier. Then came, in 1978, despite the strident peals of human rights of that time, a parliamentary amendment to the Procedure Code and Section 433-A was sternly woven, with virtual consensus, into the punitive fabric obligating the actual detention in prison for full fourteen years as a mandatory minimum in the two classes of cases where the court could have punished the offender with death but did not, or where the court did punish the culprit with death but he survived through commutation to life Imprisonment granted under Section 433(a) of the Procedure Code. All the lifers lugged into these two categories -- and they form the bulk of lire-convicts in our prisons--suddenly found themselves legally robbed of their human longing to be set free under the remission' scheme. This poignant shock is at the back of the rain of writ petitions under Article 32; and the despondent prisoners have showered arguments against the privative provision (Section 433A) as constitutional anathema and penological atavism, incompetent for Parliament and violative of fundamental rights and reformatory goals. The single issue, which has proliferated into many at the hands of a plurality of advocates, is whether Section 433A is void for unconstitutionally and, alternatively, whether the said harsh provision admits of interpretative liberality which enlarges the oasis of early release and narrow down the compulsive territory of 14-year jail term. Lord Denning, in the first Hamlyn Lectures and Sir Norman Anderson in the next before last of the series, emphasised;
...the fundamental principle in our courts that where there is any conflict between the freedom of the individual and any other rights or interests, then no matter how great or powerful those others may be, the freedom of the humblest citizen shall prevail.
Of course, most of the petitioners belong to 'the poorest, the lowliest and the lost. For those who listlessly languish waiting for their date with Freedom, the human hope of going home holds the lamp of life burning and a blanket ban against release before a brutal span of full 14 years, even if their habitation be ever so complete and convincing, benumbs the very process of restoration which is cardinal to the rationale of penal servitude. Indeterminate sentences for the same reason, have been criticised since they have led to a system of sentencing which has worked substantial hardship and injustice on countless inmates. Indeterminate sentences generally are much longer and more costly than fixed sentences and create additional emotional strain on both the inmate and his family, who are left to wonder when they will be freed. Alfred Cohn and Roy Udolf, The Criminal Justice System and its Psychology, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. New York, p. 298 99.
The imprisoned poet, Oscar Wilde wrote that courts must know when adjudicating the arbitrariness of long-term minima implacably imposed in the name of social defence Ballad of Reading Gaol:
Something was dead in each of us,
And what was dead was Hope.
X X X
The vilest deeds like poison weeds Bloom well in prison-air:
It is only what is good in man That wastes and withers there:
Pale Anguish keeps the heavy gate, And the Warder is Despair.
These generalities only serve as a backdrop to the consideration of the multi-pronged attack on the vires of Section 433-A. For judicial diagnosis, we must read it whole before dissecting into parts:
433A. Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 432, where a sentence of imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of a person for an offence for which death is one of the punishments provided by law, or where the sentence of death imposed on a person has been commuted under Section 433 into one of imprisonment for life, such person shall not be released from prison unless be had served atleast fourteen years of imprisonment.
Piecemeal understanding, like a little learning may prove to be a dangerous thing. To get a bang of the whole subject matter we must read Sections 432 and 433 too.
432. (1) When any person has been sentenced to punishment for an offence, the appropriate Government may, at any time without conditions or upon any conditions which the person sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or any part of the punishment to which he has been sentenced.
433. The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the person sentenced, commute--
(a) a sentence of death, for any other punishment provided by the Indian Penal Code;
(b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years or for fine;
(c) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for simple imprisonment for any term to which that person might have been sentenced, or for fine;
(d) a sentence of simple imprisonment, for fine.
4. The Sections above quoted relate to remission and commutation of sentences. There were similar provisions in the earlier Code corresponding to Sections 432 and 433 (Sections 401 and 402 of the 1898 Code), but Section 433-A is altogether new. 'Ay, there's the rub'. It is obvious that Section 432 clothes the appropriate Government with the power to remit the whole or part of any sentence. The mechanics for exercising this power and the conditions subject to which the power is to be exercised are also imprinted in the Section. This is a wide power which, in the absence of Section 433-A, extends to remission of the entire life sentence if Government chooses to do. A liberal or promiscuous use of the power of remission under Section 433(a) may mean that many a murderer or other offender who could have been given death sentence by the court but has been actually awarded only life sentence may legally bolt away the very next morning, the very next year, after a decade or at any other time the appropriate Government is in a mood to remit his sentence. Bizarre freaks of remissions,--such, for instance, as the impertinent happenstance of a Home Minister's 'hallowed' presence on an official visit to the Prison resulting in remissions of sentences--have been brought to our notice, making us stagger at the thought that even high constitutional powers are devalued in practice by those 'dressed in a little brief authority' thereby encouraging the fallacious impression that functionaries of our Republic are re-incarnated quasi-maharajas of medieval vintage. We will deal with it a little later under Article 161 of the Constitution but mention it here to prove what, perhaps, provoked Parliament to enact Section 433A. In many States, we are told, lifers falling within, the twin tainted categories routinely earned remissions under the extant rules resulting in their release in the matter of a few years. The penological sense of Parliament was apparently outraged by such extreme abbreviations of life sentences where the offence was grave as might have invited even death penalty. The same situation prevailed in regard to those who had actually been subjected to death penalty but, thanks to Section 433(a), had a commuted sentence of life imprisonment. Taking cognizance of such utter punitive laxity in these two graver classes of cases, the Joint Committee, which went into the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, suggested that a long enough minimum sentence should be suffered by both classes of lifers. The draconian provision (as some counsel have described it) was the product of the Joint Committee's proposal to add a proviso to Section 57 of the Penal Code. Its appropriate place was in the Procedure Code and so Section 433-A was enacted when the Criminal Procedure Code was amended. It was a punitive prescription made to parliamentary measure which prohibited premature release before the lifer suffered actual incarceration for 14 years. No opposition to this clause was voiced in Parliament (Sixth Lok Sabha) so far as our attention was drawn, although that was, vocally peaking, a period of high tide of human rights (1978).
5. The Objects and Reasons throw light on the 'why' of this new provision:
The CrPC, 1973 came into force on the 1st day of April, 1974. The working of the new Code has been carefully watched and in the light of the experience it has been found necessary to make a few changes for removing certain difficulties and doubts. The notes on clauses explain in brief the reasons for the amendments.
The notes on clauses give the further explanation:
Clause 33: Section 432 contains provision relating to powers of the appropriate Government to suspend or remit sentences. The joint Committee on the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1972, had suggested the insertion of a proviso to Section 57 of the Indian Penal Code to the effect that a person who has been sentenced to death and whose death sentence has been commuted into that of life imprisonment and persons who have been sentenced to life imprisonment for a capital offence should undergo actual imprisonment of 14 years in jail, since this particular matter relates more appropriately to the Criminal Procedure Code, a new section is being inserted to cover the proviso inserted by the Joint Committee.
This takes us to the Joint Committee's recommendation on Section 57 of the Penal Code that being the inspiration for Clause 33. For the sake of completeness, we may quote that recommendation:
Section 57 of the Code as proposed to be amended had provided that in calculating tractions of terms of punishment, imprisonment for life should be reckoned as equivalent to rigorous imprisonment for twenty years. In this connection attention of the Committee was brought to the aspect that sometimes due to grant of remission even murderers sentenced or commuted to life imprisonment were released at the end of 5 to 6 years. The committee feels that such a convict should not be released unless he has served at-least fourteen years of imprisonment.
6. Shortly put, the parliamentary committee concerned with the amendments to the Penal Code was seriously upset by the gross reductions and remissions resulting in premature releases of life sentences for capital offences. This proposal was transposed into the Criminal Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill in Clause 33 and eventuated in the incarnation of Section 433-A with none in Parliament shedding a human rights tear, although before us several counsel have turned truly eloquent, even indignant, in the name of human rights. Of course, parliamentary taciturnity does not preclude forensic examination about legislative competency. Nor does it relieve this Court, as sentinel on the qui vive, from defending fundamental rights against legislative aggression, if any flagrant excesses were clearly made out.
7. We have to examine the legislative history of Sections 432 and 433 and study the heritage of Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution. But this we undertake at the appropriate stage, Before proceeding further, we may briefly formulate the contentions which have been urged by wave after wave of counsel. The principal challenge has been based upon an alleged violation of Articles 72 and 161 by the enactment of Section 433-A. Sarvashri Nand Lal, R.K. Garg, Mridul, Tarkunde and Dr. Singhvi, among others have argued (his point with repetitive vehemence and feeling for personal freedom. The bar is the bastion. Indeed, Shri Garg was shocked that we were not 'shocked' by such long incarceration being made a statutory condition for release of a 'lifer' guilty of murder and was flabbergasted at even a faint suggestion that the President or the Governor might exercise his power of commutation guided, inter alia, by the parliamentary pointer expressed in Section 433-A. The next contention voiced with convincing vigour by Shri Tarkunde was that Section 433-A violated Article 14 being wholly arbitrary and irrational. Shri Mridul, with persuasive flavour, stressed that Section 433-A lacked legislative competency under the Lists and must be struck down for the additional reason of contravention of Article 20(1) of the Constitution and backed his plea with American authorities. Shri Kakkar made an independent contribution, apart from endorsement of the earlier submissions by other counsel. The main thrust of his argument, which was ingeniously appealing was that the various provisions for remissions under the Prison Rules and other legislations had their full operation notwithstanding Section 433-A, thanks to the savings provisions in Section 5 of the Procedure Code.
8. Dr. Singhvi, who brought up the rear, belatedly but eruditely strengthened the arguments of those who had gone before him by reference to the abortive history of the amendment of Section 302, I. P. C. and the necessity of having to read down the text of Section 433-A in the context of the story of its birth. Apart from the legislative vicissitudes in the light of which he wanted us to interpret Section 433-A restrictively, Dr. Singhvi treated us to the provisions of the Irish Constitution and international human rights norms by way of contrast and desired us to give effect to the rules of remission atleast as directives for the exercise of the high prerogative powers under Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution. Others who appeared in the many writ petitions made supplementary submissions numerically strong but lacking legal muscles, some of which we will refer to in passing. One of the lifers, having been an advocate by profession, chose to appear in person and made brief submissions in interpretation which did not impress us.
9. The Union of India, represented by the learned Solicitor General, has repudiated the infirmities imputed to Section 433-A. We must appreciatively mention that he did tersely meet point by point, with persuasive precision, juristic nicety, case-law erudition and fair concession. His submissions have helped us see the issues in perspective and focus attention on fundamentals without being sidetracked by frills and frippery.
10. There has been much over-lapping inevitable in plural orality but the impressive array of arguments on a seemingly small point does credit to the expansive potential of the forensic cosmos but brings despair when we contemplate the utter chaos in court having regard to the total litigation crying for justice. A new modus vivendi is as imperative as it is urgent if the kismet of the court system must survive the challenge--'to be or not to be'].
11. A preliminary observation may be merited since much argument has been made on the duty of this Court to uphold human rights. Counsel for the petitioners, who new rightly toll the knell of prisoners' reformative freedom, have not shown us any criticism in the Press--the Fourth Estate--or by any member or Party in Parliament or outside, about this allegedly obnoxious provision repelling rules of remission and legislations for shortening sentences, the high tide of human rights notwithstanding, Judge Learned Hand's famous warning about liberty lying in the bosoms of the people comes to mind. Court comes last; where is the first?
12. Issues of liberty are healthy politics and those sincerely committed to human rights must come to the support of poor prisoners who have no votes nor voice and may perhaps be neglected by human rights vocalists with electoral appetites. It is a little strange that when no dissent is raised in Press or Parliament and a legislation has gone through with ease there should be omnibus demand in court as a last refuge for release of prisoners detained under a permanent legislation, forgetting the functional limitations of judicial power.
13. Nevertheless, we will cover fee entire spectrum of submissions including those based upon fundamental freedoms because courts cannot abdicate constitutional obligation, even if Parliament be pachydermic and politicians indifferent. (With great respect, ordinarily they are not.) Indeed, we must go further, on account of our accountability to the Constitution and the country and clarify that where constitutional liberties are imperilled judges cannot be non-aligned. But we must remind counsel that where counterfeit constitutional claims are pressed with forensic fervour courts do not readily oblige by consenting to be stampeded. Justice is made of sterner stuff, though its core is like 'the gentle rain from heaven' being interlaced with mercy. We may now proceed to deal with we principal arguments and logically we must dispose of the question of legislative competency of Parliament to enact a minimum period of detention in prison.
14. We may safely assume that, but for the bar of Section 433-A, the rules of remission and short-sentencing legislation would, in all probability, result in orders of release by Government of the thousands of petitioners before us. Thus, it is of central importance to decide whether Parliament has no legislative competence to enact the impugned provision.
15. We dismiss the contention of competency as of little substance. It is trite law that the Lists in the Seventh Schedule broadly delineate the rubrics of legislation and must be interpreted liberally. Article 246(2) gives power to Parliament to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III. Entries 1 and 2 in List III (especially Entry 2) are abundantly comprehensive to cover legislation such as is contained in Section 433A, which merely enacts a rider, as it were, to Sections 432 and 433(a). We cannot read into it a legislation on the topic of 'Prisons and Prisoners'. On the other hand, it sets a lower limit to the execution of the punishment provided by the Penal Code and is appropriately placed in the Chanter on Execution and Sentences in the Procedure Code. Once we accept the irrefutable position that the execution, remission and commutation of sentences primarily fall, as in the earlier Code (Criminal Procedure Code, 1886), within the present Procedure Code (Chapter XXXII), we may rightly assign Section 483A to entry 2 in List III as a cognate provision integral to remission and commutation, as it sets limits to the power conferred by the preceding two sections. This limited prescription as a proviso to the earlier prescription relates to execution of sentence, not conditions in prison or regulation of prisoner's life. The distinction between prisons and prisoners on the one band and sentences and their execution, remission and commutation on the other, is fine but real. To bastardize Section 433A as outside the legitimacy of Entry 2 in List III is to breach all canons of constitutional interpretation of legislative Lists. Parliament has competency.
16. Let us assume for a moment that the laws of remission and short-sentencing are enacted under Entry 4 of List II. In that event the States' competency to enact cannot be challenged. After all, even in prison-prisoner legislation, there may be beneficent provisions to promote the habilitative potential and reduce warder--prisoner friction by stick-cum carrot strategies. Offer of remission paroles, supervised releases, opportunities for Self-improvement by family contacts, time in community work centers and even meditational centers, can properly belong to prison legislation. Rewards by remissions, like punishments by privations are permissible under Entry 4 of List II. Indeed, progressive rehabilitatory prison laws which have a dynamic correctional orientation and reformatory destination, including meaningful intermissions and humane remissions is on the Indian agenda of unfulfilled legislations. Apart from these futurological measures, we have here an existing Central Law, viz. the Prisons Act, 1894 which in Section 59(27) expressly sanctions rules for premature re-lease. Even so, the power of the State is subject to Article 246(1) and (2) and so parliamentary legislation prevails over. State legislation. Moreover, Article 254 resolves the conflict in favour of parliamentary legislation. If a State intends to legislate under Entry 2 of List III such as can prevail in that State as against a parliamentary legislation only if presidential assent has been obtained in terms of Article 254(2). In the present case there is hardly any doubt that Section 433A must hold its sway over any State legislation even regarding 'prisons and prisoners' if its provisions are repugnant to the Central Law. We may read the Remission Schemes not as upsetting sentences but as merely providing rewards and remissions for in prison good conduct and the like. If the sentence is life imprisonment remissions, as such, cannot help as Godse has laid down. If the sentence is for a fixed term, remissions may help but Section 433A does not come in the way. Thus, no incompatibility between Section 433A and remission provisions exists.
17. This indubitable constitutional position drove counsel to seek refuge in the limited nature of the non obstante Clause in Section 433-A and the savings provision in Section 5 of the Procedure Code itself. The contention was that Section 433A allowed free play for the rules of remission and short-sentencing legislation. The narrow scope of the non obstante clause was the basis of this argument. It excluded the operation of Section 432 only and thereby implicitly sanctioned the operational survival of Remission Rules made by the various States. This argument hardly appeals to reason because it fails to square with the command of the substantive text and virtually stultifies the imperative part of the Section.
18. In the province of interpretation, industry and dexterity of counsel can support any meaning, what with lexical plurality, case-law prodigality and profusion of canons to support any position. We had better base ourselves on the plain, purpose and obvious sense of the statute which is a sure semantic navigatory before turning to erudite alternatives. Oliver Wendel Holmes has wisely said: It is sometimes more important to emphasize the obvious than to elucidate the obscure." Another sage counsel is Frankfurter's threefold advice: H. Friendly. Benchmarks 202 (1967).
(1) Read the statute; (2) read the statute; (8) read the statute.
19. If we read Section 433-A and emphasise the obvious, it easily discloses the dividing line between sense and non-sense. The fasciculus of clauses (Ss. 432, 433 and 433-A), read as a package, makes it clear that while the Code does confer wide powers of remission and commutation of sentences it emphatically intends to carve out an extreme category from the broad generosity of such executive power. The non obstante clause, in terms, excludes Section 432 and the whole mandate of the rest of the Section necessarily subjects the operation of Section 433(a) to a serious restriction. This embargo directs that commutation in such cases shall not reduce the actual duration of imprisonment below 141 years. Whether that Section suffers from any fatal constitutional infirmity is another matter but it does declare emphatically an imperative intent to keep imprisoned for atleast 14 years those who tall within the sinister categories spell out in the operative part of Section 433A. The argument is that the non obstante clauses coven only Section 432 and significantly omits the common phraseology 'or any other law in force' and, therefore, all other provisions of law which reduce or remit the length of the incarceration prevail over Section 433-A. In particular, the Prison Rules and local short-sentencing laws will diminish the length of prison tenancy of all the lifers, despite the command of Section 433A. Why? Because the non obstante clause is limited in nature and excludes only Section 432, The Prisons Act, 1894, is 'existing law' saved by Article 366(10) and Article 372(1). Section 59 of that Act vests rule-making power in States. Specifically S 59(s) refers to rules regulating "the award of marks and the shortening of sentences". Clearly," therefore, the States have the power to make rules on Remission Systems and many States have, for long, made and worked such rules. They are intra vires, since even new legislations on remissions and rewards are good under Entry 4 of List II. These vintage schemes do not vanish with the enactment of the Constitution but suffer a partial eclipse if they conflict with and become repugnant to a Central law like the Procedure Code. If Section 433-A. by sheer repugnancy, forces a permanent holiday on the prison remission laws of the States vis a vis certain classes of lifers', the former must prevail in situations of irreconcilability. Assuming that Rules under the Prisons Act are valid and cannot be dismissed as State law, a harmonious reading of Section 433A and the Prison Rules must be the way out. Otherwise, the later law must prevail or implied repeal may be inferred. We may not be compelled to explore these ramifications here since the Remission Rules can peacefully co-exist with Section 433-A once we grasp the ratio in Godse's case MANU/SC/0156/1961 : 1961CriLJ736a and Rabha's case MANU/SC/0190/1960 : [1961]2SCR133
20. We cannot agree with counsel that the non obstante provision impliedly sustains. It is elementary that a non obstante tail should not wag a statutory dog (see for similar idea, "The Interpretation and Application of Statute's by Reed Dicker-son, p, 10). This Court has held way back in 1952 in Aswini Kumar Chose, MANU/SC/0022/1952 : [1953]4SCR1 that a non obstante clause cannot whittle down the wide import of the principal part. The enacting part is clear and the non obstante clause cannot cut down its scope.
21. The learned Solicitor General reinforced the conclusion by pointing out that the whole exercise of S, 433 A, as the notes on clauses revealed, was aimed at excluding the impact of Prison Remissions which led to unduly early release of graver lifers'. Parliament knew the 'vice', had before it the State Remission Systems and sought to nullify their effect in a certain class of cases by use of mandatory language. To read down Section 433-A to give overriding effect to the Remission Rules of the State would render the purposeful exercise a ludicrous futility. If 'Laws suffer from the disease of Language', Reed Dickerson, The Interpretation and Application of Statutes P. 13 courts must cure the patient, not kill him. We have no hesitation to hold that notwithstanding the 'notwithstanding...' in Section 433A, the Remission Rules and like provisions stand excluded so far as 'lifers punished for capital offences are concerned.
22. The learned Solicitor General explained why the draftsman was content with mentioning only Section 432 in the non obstante clause." The scheme of Section 432, lead with the court's pronouncement in Godse's case MANU/SC/0156/1961 : 1961CriLJ736a (supra), furnishes the clue We will briefly indicate the argument and later expatiate on the implications of Godse's case (supra) as it has an important bearing on our decision.
23. Sentencing is a judicial function but the execution of the sentence, after the courts pronouncement, is ordinarily a matter for the Executive under the Procedure Code, going by Entry 2 in List III of the Seventh Schedule. Keeping aside the constitutional powers under Articles 72 and 161 which are 'untouchable' and 'unapproachable' for any legislature, let us examine the law of sentencing, remission and release. Once a sentence has been imposed, the only way to terminate it before the stipulated term is by action under Sections 432/433 or Articles 72/161. And if the latter power under the Constitution is not invoked, the only source of salvation is the play of power under Sections 432 and 433(a) so far as a 'lifer' is concerned. No release by reduction or remission of sentence is possible under the corpus juris as it stands, in any other way. The legislative power of the State under Entry 4 of List II, even if it be stretched to snapping point, can deal only with Prisons and Prisoners, never with truncation of judicial sentences. Remissions by way of reward or otherwise cannot cut down the sentence as such and cannot, let it be unmistakably understood, grant final exit passport for the prisoner except by the Government action under Section 432(1). The topic of Prisons and Prisoners does not cover release by way of reduction of the sentence itself. That belongs to Criminal Procedure in Entry 2 of List III although when the sentence is for a fixed term and remission plus the period undergone equal that term the prisoner may win his freedom. Any amount of remission to result in manumission requires action under Section 432(1), read with the Remission Rules. That is why Parliament, tracing the single source of remission of sentence to Section 432, blocked it by the non obstante clause. No remission, however long, can set the prisoner free at the instance of the State, before the judicial sentence has run out, save by action under the constitutional power or under Section 432. So read, the inference is inevitable, even if the contrary argument be ingenious, that Section 433-A achieves what it wants--arrest the release of certain classes of 'lifers' before a certain period, by blocking Section 432, Articles 72 and 161 are, of course, excluded from this discussion as being beyond any legislative power to curb or confine.