MANU/SC/0291/2020
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 7357-7376 of 2010
Decided On: 06.03.2020
Appellants: Nandan Biomatrix Ltd.
Vs.
Respondent: S. Ambika Devi and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar and R. Subhash Reddy, JJ.
Subject: Consumer
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986 [REPEALED] - Section 2(d)
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Seeds Act, 1966; Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - 2(d), Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - 2(f)
Cases Referred:
Laxmi Engineering Works v. P.S.G. Industrial Institute MANU/SC/0271/1995; Rajeev Metal Works and Ors. v. The Mineral & Metal Trading Corporation of India Ltd. MANU/SC/0294/1996; National Seeds Corporation Ltd. v. M. Madhusudhan Reddy and Anr. MANU/SC/0038/2012; Sakthi Sugars Ltd. Orissa v. Sridhar Sahoo and Ors. MANU/CF/0031/1999; Synco Textiles Pvt. Ltd. v. Greaves Cotton and Co. Ltd. MANU/CF/0109/1990 : (1991) 1 CPJ 499; Oswal Fine Arts v. HMT, MANU/CF/0014/1989 : (1991) 1 CPJ 330; Secretary, Consumer Guidance and Research Society of India v. BPL India Ltd. MANU/CF/0370/1992 : (1992) 1 CPJ 140 (NC); Fruit and Vegetable Project, New Delhi v. N. Sankar Reddy, MANU/CF/0288/1994 : III (1994) CPJ 163 (NC); Wimco Limited v. Ashok Sekhon, MANU/CF/0348/2008 : II (2008) CPJ 210 (NC); Prithviraj Narayanrao Chavan v. The National Seeds Corporation Ltd. MANU/CF/0131/2012
Case Category:
MATTERS RELATING TO CONSUMER PROTECTION - SLPs RELATING TO CONSUMER PROTECTION
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  5

Distinguished
  2

Mentioned
  3

Case Note:
Consumer - Consumer - Buyback produce - Respondent-complainant entered into tripartite agreement with Appellant and its franchisee - As per agreement, Respondent purchased wet musli for sowing from Appellant and cultivated same in her land - Appellant was to buy back produce at minimum price from Respondent - Respondent lodged consumer complaint alleging negligence and breach of contract on part of Appellant on ground that Appellant failed to buy back her produce, leading to destruction of greater part of crop - District Forum dismissed complaint, and held that same was not maintainable since Respondent was not consumer within meaning of Consumer Protection Act, 1986 - On appeal, State Commission set aside order passed by District Forum, holding that Respondent was consumer under 1986 Act - Revision petition was filed against said order before National Commission - National Commission upheld finding of State Commission and dismissed revision petition filed by Appellant - Hence, present appeal - Whether there was any reason to interfere with order passed by National Commission affirming that Respondent was consumer within meaning of 1986 Act.

Facts:

The complainant was a small landholder who responded to the advertisements issued by the Appellant, a seed company, regarding buyback of safed musli, a medicinal crop, at attractive prices. She entered into a tripartite agreement with the Appellant and its franchisee. As per the agreement, the Respondent purchased wet musli for sowing from the Appellant, and cultivated the same in her land. The Appellant was to buy back the produce at a minimum price from the Respondent. The Respondent lodged a consumer complaint alleging negligence and breach of contract on the part of the Appellant on the ground that the Appellant failed to buy back her produce, leading to the destruction of the greater part of the crop. The District Forum dismissed the complaint, and held that the same was not maintainable since the Respondent was not a consumer within the meaning of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. On appeal by the Respondent, the State Commission set aside the order passed by the District Forum, holding that the Respondent was a consumer under the 1986 Act, and remanded the matter to the District Forum for disposal on merits. The National Commission upheld the finding of the State Commission, holding that the covenants entered into between the parties were in the nature of both sale of product and rendering of service, since the Appellant had agreed to provide wet musli for growing to the Respondent, supplemented by technical support and guidance from its franchisee, and had further agreed to insure the crop at additional cost. Additionally, noting that the Respondent was a small landholder, who had started cultivation of musli for eking out a livelihood for herself, the National Commission held that it could not be said that the agreement was entered into for the commercial purpose of the Respondent.

Held, while dismissing the appeal:

(i) The Respondent was a housewife who has undertaken agricultural activity on land for the purpose of increasing her household income, and would perhaps not have undertaken the growing of musli if the Appellant had not assured a profitable price for buyback of the crop. At the same time, the fact that such profitable price was guaranteed by the Appellant could not now be relied upon to argue that the activity was undertaken by the Respondent for a commercial purpose, so as to exclude the same from the purview of the 1986 Act. [9.3]

(ii) It was amply evident that an agreement for buyback by the seed company of the crop grown by a farmer could not be regarded as a resale transaction, and he could not be brought out of the scope of being a consumer under the 1986 Act only on such ground. Thus, even in the instant case, the fact that there was a buyback agreement for the musli crop would not bring the Respondent outside the purview of the definition of consumer by rendering the buyback arrangement a resale transaction or being for a commercial purpose. This court hasten to emphasise that the fact situation diverges from Madhusudan to the extent that in the instant case, the Respondent had the freedom to sell her produce on the open market if she was able to obtain a better price. However, as we have already mentioned, this aspect would not take away from the conclusion that the Respondent had entered into an agreement for growing the musli crop for the purpose of earning a livelihood, since an agriculturist would always have to sell his produce in order to earn his livelihood. [10.1]

(iii) In cases where the farmer has purchased goods or availed of services in order to grow produce in order to eke out a livelihood, the fact that the said produce was being sold back to the seller or service provider or to a third party could not stand in the way of the farmer amounting to a consumer. [13.6]

(iv) Thus, there was no reason to interfere with the order passed by the National Commission affirming that the Respondent was consumer within the meaning of the 1986 Act. [17]

Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
JUDGMENT
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar, J.
Civil Appeal No. 7357/2010
1. The instant appeal arises against the order dated 15.04.2009 passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi ("the National Commission"), affirming the order dated 28.04.2008 of the Kerala State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission ("the State Commission") setting aside the order of the District Forum, Kozhikode dismissing the complaint and remanding the matter to the District Forum for disposal on merits.
2. The brief facts leading to this appeal are as follows:
2.1 The complainant (the Respondent herein) is a small landholder who responded to the advertisements issued by the Appellant, a seed company, in 2003, regarding buyback of safed musli, a medicinal crop, at attractive prices. She entered into a tripartite agreement dated 15.01.2004 with the Appellant and its franchisee M/s. Herbz India. As per the agreement, the Respondent purchased 750 kgs of wet musli for sowing from the Appellant, at the rate of Rs. 400/- per kg, and cultivated the same in her land. The Appellant was to buy back the produce at a minimum price of Rs. 1,000/- per kg from the Respondent. The Respondent lodged a consumer complaint alleging negligence and breach of contract on the part of the Appellant on the ground that the Appellant failed to buy back her produce, leading to the destruction of the greater part of the crop.
2.2 The District Forum dismissed the complaint, and held that the same was not maintainable since the Respondent was not a "consumer" within the meaning of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 ("the 1986 Act"). On appeal by the Respondent, the State Commission set aside the order passed by the District Forum, holding that the Respondent was a "consumer" under the 1986 Act, and remanded the matter to the District Forum for disposal on merits. It is this order which was impugned before the National Commission by way of a revision petition filed by the Appellant.
2.3 The National Commission upheld the finding of the State Commission, holding that the covenants entered into between the parties were in the nature of both sale of product and rendering of service, since the Appellant had agreed to provide wet musli for growing to the Respondent, supplemented by technical support and guidance from its franchisee, and had further agreed to insure the crop at additional cost. Additionally, noting that the Respondent was a small landholder owning about 1-1.5 acres of land, who had started cultivation of musli for eking out a livelihood for herself, the National Commission held that it could not be said that the agreement was entered into for the commercial purpose of the Respondent. The Revision Petition was dismissed with a cost of Rs. 2,500/- imposed on the Appellant, payable to the Respondent.
2.4 The instant appeal has been filed against the above order of the National Commission.
3. Before us, learned Counsel for the Appellant, Mr. Raghenth Basant, argued that the Respondent was not a "consumer" as defined Under Section 2(d) of the 1986 Act. Firstly, it was argued that the tripartite agreement envisaged buyback of musli by the Respondent from the Appellant, which amounted to resale, which is excluded from the purview of Section 2(d). Secondly, it was argued that the cultivation and sale of musli by the Respondent was for a commercial purpose and not for the purpose of earning livelihood, and hence excluded from the purview of Section 2(d).
4. Learned Counsel for the Respondent, Mr. Santosh Paul, on the other hand, argued that the cultivation of musli was not being done on a commercial level, but was purely on a self-employed basis done by a poor agriculturist for eking out a livelihood, and hence such cultivation did not fall within the meaning of "commercial purpose" under the Explanation to Section 2(d) of the 1986 Act.
5. Heard the counsel on either side and perused the record.
6. Clearly, the only aspect for consideration before us is whether the Respondent was excluded from the purview of the definition of "consumer" Under Section 2(d) of the 1986 Act on account of the subject transaction amounting to resale or for being for a commercial purpose.
7. It would be pertinent to begin our discussion by referring to the definition of the term "consumer" Under Section 2(d) under the 1986 Act:
(d) "consumer" means any person who--
(i) buys any goods, for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or partly promised or under any system of deferred payment when such use is made with the approval of such person but does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for any commercial purpose; or
(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any beneficiary of such services other than the person who hires or avails of the service for consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned person but does not include a person who avails of such services for any commercial purposes;
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this clause, "commercial purpose" does not include use by a person of goods bought and used by him and services availed by him exclusively for the purposes of earning his livelihood by means of self-employment.
(emphasis supplied)
8. It is relevant to note that the explanation regarding the meaning of "commercial purpose" was added vide an amendment in 1993, and was considered for the first time by this Court in Laxmi Engineering Works v. PSG Industrial Institute, MANU/SC/0271/1995 : (1995) 3 SCC 583. In this case, the Court noted that even prior to the 1993 amendment, the National Commission had been taking a consistent view that was broadly in accord with the amended definition, i.e. only persons purchasing goods or availing of services for carrying on activity on a large scale, for the purpose of earning profit, would be excluded from the ambit of the definition of "consumer" [see Synco Textiles Pvt. Ltd. v. Greaves Cotton and Co. Ltd., MANU/CF/0109/1990 : (1991) 1 CPJ 499; Oswal Fine Arts v. HMT, MANU/CF/0014/1989 : (1991) 1 CPJ 330; and Secretary, Consumer Guidance and Research Society of India v. BPL India Ltd., MANU/CF/0370/1992 : (1992) 1 CPJ 140 (NC)].
8.1. On this basis, this Court affirmed that the amendment was only clarificatory in nature, and that though the question regarding whether the purpose for which goods have been bought or services rendered is a "commercial purpose" is to be answered on the facts of each case, a person buying goods and using them himself exclusively for the purpose of earning a livelihood by means of self-employment would be covered by the definition of "consumer" within the 1986 Act, even if such use is commercial use. In this regard, the Court in Laxmi Engineering observed:
11. ... a person who buys a typewriter or a car and uses them for his personal use is certainly a consumer but a person who buys a typewriter or a car for typing others' work for consideration or for plying the car as a taxi can be said to be using the typewriter/car for a commercial purpose. The explanation however clarifies that in certain situations, purchase of goods for "commercial purpose" would not yet take the purchaser out of the definition of expression 'consumer'. If the commercial use is by the purchaser himself for the purpose of earning his livelihood by means of self-employment, such purchaser of goods is yet a 'consumer'. In the illustration given above, if the purchaser himself works on typewriter or plies the car as a taxi himself, he does not cease to be a consumer. In other words, if the buyer of goods uses them himself, i.e., by self-employment, for earning his livelihood, it would not be treated as a "commercial purpose" and he does not cease to be a consumer for the purposes of the Act. The explanation reduces the question, what is a "commercial purpose", to a question of fact to be decided in the facts of each case. It is not the value of the goods that matters but the purpose to which the goods bought are put to. The several words employed in the explanation, viz., "uses them by himself", "exclusively for the purpose of earning his livelihood" and "by means of self-employment" make the intention of Parliament abundantly clear, that the goods bought must be used by the buyer himself, by employing himself for earning his livelihood. A few more illustrations would serve to emphasise what we say. A person who purchases an auto-rickshaw to ply it himself on hire for earning his livelihood would be a consumer. Similarly, a purchaser of a truck who purchases it for plying it as a public carrier by himself would be a consumer. A person who purchases a lathe machine or other machine to operate it himself for earning his livelihood would be a consumer. (In the above illustrations, if such buyer takes the assistance of one or two persons to assist/help him in operating the vehicle or machinery, he does not cease to be a consumer.) As against this a person who purchases an auto-rickshaw, a car or a lathe machine or other machine to be plied or operated exclusively by another person would not be a consumer. This is the necessary limitation flowing from the expressions "used by him", and "by means of self-employment" in the explanation. The ambiguity in the meaning of the words "for the purpose of earning his livelihood" is explained and clarified by the other two sets of words.
(emphasis supplied)
8.2. Notably, it was emphasized that the employment of a few persons for the purpose of assistance in the activity carried out by the purchaser would not automatically render the commercial activity as not being for self-employment and for earning his livelihood; rather, this would have to be determined from the facts and circumstances of a given case.
9. In the matter on hand, though the Appellant has sought to project that the Respondent were cultivating musli on a large scale and with a profit motive, we find ourselves unable to conclude that the cultivation being undertaken was for a purpose other than for eking out a livelihood through self-employment.
9.1. In matters such as the one on hand, the agriculturist buys the foundation seeds from the seed company, or the company itself reaches out and requests the farmers to generate the seeds so that it may market the same. By accepting such an offer, and after purchasing the foundation seeds from the seed company, the agriculturist, with hard labour and sweat, produces seeds to be marketed by the seed company. Thus, the agriculturist is not reselling any product, but grows his own product by utilizing the foundation seeds. There cannot be any dispute that the agriculturist has to sell his product in the open market or to the seed company, as the case may be, in order to eke out his livelihood. In other words, the agriculturist sustains himself by selling his product. This cannot be termed as resale or activity in furtherance of a "commercial purpose" bringing him out of the purview of the definition of "consumer" Under Section 2(d). Rather, it is purely for the purpose of earning his livelihood by means of self-employment.
9.2. Contrary to what the Appellant has sought to impress upon us, we find that cases such as these cannot be compared to activities undertaken by industrial concerns, for example, where the employment of raw materials to produce finished goods for sale has also been held by this Court to amount to resale or being for a commercial purpose [see Rajeev Metal Works v. Mineral & Metal Trading Corporation of India Ltd., MANU/SC/0294/1996 : (1996) 9 SCC 422].
9.3. Indeed, in the matter on hand, the Respondent is a housewife who has undertaken agricultural activity on land of 1-1.5 acres for the purpose of increasing her household income, and would perhaps not have undertaken the growing of musli if the Appellant had not assured a profitable price for buyback of the crop. of course, we cannot base our conclusion on any surmise or conjecture in this regard. At the same time, in our opinion, the fact that such profitable price was guaranteed by the Appellant cannot now be relied upon to argue that the activity was undertaken by the Respondent for a "commercial purpose", so as to exclude the same from the purview of the 1986 Act.
10. We particularly find the argument untenable that the tripartite agreement would amount to resale by virtue of containing a buyback clause, and would hence exclude the Respondent from the ambit of the definition of "consumer". In this regard, we find it relevant to refer to the decision of this Court in National Seeds Corporation Ltd. v. M. Madhusudan Reddy, MANU/SC/0038/2012 : (2012) 2 SCC 506, where this Court was seized of appeals arising out of consumer complaints filed by farmers engaged in agriculture and seed production, who had purchased seeds from the National Seeds Corporation Ltd. which had turned out to be defective, leading to below par germination. Some of these farmers had entered into agreements whereby they purchased foundation seeds from the seed company and agreed to grow seeds and sell them back to the company for profit. The company had rejected the grown seeds for being unfit for certification. While dealing with the question of whether a farmer would be excluded from the definition of "consumer" because the seeds produced by him were required to be supplied back to the seed corporation that supplied the foundation seeds, this Court, taking note of the elaboration on the scope and ambit of the expression "commercial purpose" as undertaken in Laxmi Engineering (supra), observed as follows:
73. What needs to be emphasised is that the Appellant had selected a set of farmers in the area for growing seeds on its behalf. After entering into agreements with the selected farmers, the Appellant supplied foundation seeds to them for a price, with an assurance that within a few months they will be able to earn profit. The seeds were sown under the supervision of the expert deputed by the Appellant. The entire crop was to be purchased by the Appellant. The agreements entered into between the Appellant and the growers clearly postulated supply of the foundation seeds by the Appellant with an assurance that the crop will be purchased by it. It is neither the pleaded case of the Appellant nor was any evidence produced before any of the Consumer Forums that the growers had the freedom to sell the seeds in the open market or to any person other than the Appellant. Therefore, it is not possible to take the view that the growers had purchased the seeds for resale or for any commercial purpose and they are excluded from the definition of the term "consumer". As a matter of fact, the evidence brought on record shows that the growers had agreed to produce seeds on behalf of the Appellant for the purpose of earning their livelihood by using their skills and labour.