MANU/SC/0433/1994
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petn. (Crl.) Nos. 409 of 1986 and 419 of 1987.
Decided On: 26.04.1994
Appellants:P. Rathinam and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
R.M. Sahai and B.L. Hansaria, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: R. Venkataramani Advocate (NP) Ranjan Dwivedi, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: V.C. Mahajan, Tara Chandra Sharma, P. Parmeswaran, D.S. Mehra, Sushma and Suri, Advs.
Subject: Criminal
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 25; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 2; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 292; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 306; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 309; Probation Of Offenders Act, 1958 - Section 12
Relevant Section:
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 309
Cases Referred:
Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration, MANU/SC/0184/1978; Charles Shobraj v. Supdt. Central Jail, MANU/SC/0070/1978; M.H. Hoaskot v. State of Maharashtra, MANU/SC/0119/1978; Hussainara Khatoon v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar, MANU/SC/0119/1979; Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Administration, MANU/SC/0084/1980; CESC Ltd. v. Subhas Chandra, MANU/SC/0466/1992; Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, MANU/SC/0039/1985; Deena v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0094/1983; Ranjit D Udeshi v. State of Maharashtra, MANU/SC/0080/1964; Bhagwant v. Gangabishan, MANU/MH/0037/1940 ; Mafizuddin v. Habibuddin, MANU/WB/0097/1957; Colapatri v. Colapatri, MANU/AP/0162/1964; Ratan Chand v. Ashkar, MANU/AP/0125/1976; State v. Nagbhushan Patnaik, GR Case No. 177 of 1984; Enderby Town Football Club Ltd. v. Football Association Limited, (1971) Ch 591, (1971) 1 All ER 215, (1970) 3 WLR 1021 ; Griswols v. Connecticut, (1965) 381 US 479; Law Ed 604, 94 Solesbee v. Balkcom, (1949) 339 US 9; 24 Law Ed 77, Munn v. Illnois (1876) 94 US 113; Franklin Fire Ins. Co. v. Moll, 58 NE Zd 948, 115 I A 289; Clough v. Gardiner, 182 NYS 804, 111 Mis 244; Barwin v. Reidy, 307 2d 175, 62 NM 183; Pendeleton v. Greever, J 193 p 885,80 OKL 35, 17 ALR 317; Draughon v. Fox Pelletir Corporation, 126 SW 2d 329, 174 Tenn 457; Mckay v. Bergstedt; R.C. Cooper v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0074/1970; Unnikrishnan v. State of Andhra Pradesh, MANU/SC/0333/1993; Satwant Singh Swahney v. D. Ramarathnam APO, New Delhi, MANU/SC/0040/1967; Govinda v. State of M.P. MANU/SC/0119/1975; Griswolda v. Connecticut, (1965) 381 US 479; T.V. Vatheeswaran v. State of T.N., MANU/SC/0382/1983; A.G. of India v. Lachma Devi, ; Gherulal Parakh v. Mahadeodas, MANU/SC/0024/1959; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. v. Brojo Nath MANU/SC/0439/1986
Disposition:
In Favour of Accused
Authorities Referred:
Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences, Volume 21 (1) September 1988, "Commentaries on the Laws of England" (1765); Justice Krishana Iyer in his book on "Perspectives in Criminology, Law and Social Change" (1980) at pages 7 and 8, page 7, R.S. Cavan's "Criminology" (2nd Edn.); he treaties on "Crime and its Prevention" edited by Stephen Lewin, Editor, World Week Magazine, would show how complicated the subject is.
Cases Overruled / Reversed: 
Maruti Shripati Dubal v. State of Maharashtra, MANU/MH/0022/1986; Chenna Jagadeeswar v. State of Andhra Pradesh, MANU/AP/0016/1987 ; Smt. Gian Kaur vs. State of Punjab, MANU/SC/0335/1996
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  9

Dissented
  30

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  7

Case Note:
Criminal - suicide - Section 309 of Indian Penal Code, Articles 14 and 21 of Constitution of India, Section 368 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 and Section 1 of Suicide Act, 1961 - validity of Section 309 assailed being violative of Articles 14 and 21 of Constitution of India - whether attempt to commit suicide is illegal and against public policy - precedents point that Section 309 needs to be effaced - attempt to commit suicide does not cause harm to others - held, Section 309 violates Articles 14 and 21 and is void - It is no offence - Section 309, I.P.C. is violative of Article 21 of Constitution of India and is void.

ORDER
B.L. Hansaria, J.
1. Gandhiji once observed:
Death is our friend, the trust of friends. He delivers us from agony. I do not want to die of a creeping paralysis of my faculties-a defeated man
The English poet William Ernest Henley wrote:
I am the master of my fate, I am the captain of my soul.
2. Despite the above, Hamlet's dilemma of "To be or not to be" faces many a soul in times of distress, agony and suffering, when the question asked is "To die or not to die". If the decision be to die and the same is implemented to its fructification resulting in death, that is the end of the matter. The dead is relieved of the agony, pain and suffering and no evil consequences know to our law follow. But if the person concerned be unfortunate to survive, the attempt to commit suicide may see him behind the bar, as the same is punishable under Section 309 of our Penal Code.
3. The two petition at hand have assailed the validity of Section 309 by contending that the same is violative of Articles 14 & 21 of the Constitution and the prayer is to declare the section as void. The additional prayer in Writ Petition (Crl.) 419/87 is to quash the proceedings initiated against the petitioner (Nagbhusan) under Section 309.
4. The judiciary of this Country had occasion to deal with the aforesaid aspect; and we have three reported decisions of the three High Courts of the country, namely, Delhi, Bombay and Andhra Pradesh on the aforesaid question. There is also ah unreported decision of the Delhi High Court. It would be appropriate and profitable to note at the threshold what the aforesaid three High Courts have held in this regard before we apply our mind to the issue at hand.
5. The first in point of time is the decision of a Division Bench of Delhi High Court in State v. Sanjay Kumar, (1985) Crl. Law Journal, 931, in which the court was seized with the question as to whether the invest taxation of the case under Section 309 should be allowed to continue beyond the period fixed by Section 368 Cr. PC Some loud thinking was done by the Bench on the rationale of Section 309. Sachar, J., as he then was, observed for the Bench:
It is ironic that Section 309 IPC still continues to be in our Penal Code.... Strange paradox that in the age of votaries of Euthanasia, suicide should be criminally punishable. Instead of the society handing its head in shame that there should be such social strains that a young man (the hope of tomorrow) should be driven to suicide, compounds its inadequacy by treating the boy as a criminal. Instead of sending the young boy to psychiatric clinic it gleefully sends him to mingle with Criminals.... The continuance of Section 309 IPC is an anachronism unworthy of a human society like ours. Medical Clinics for such social misfits certainly but police and prisons never. The very idea is revolting. This concept seeks to meet the challenge of social strains of modern urban and competitive economy by ruthless suppression of mere symptoms -this attempt can only result in failure. Need is for human, civilized and socially oriented outlook and penology.... No wonder so long as society refuses to face this reality its coercive machinery will invoke the provision like Section 309 IPC which has no justification right to continue remain on the statute book.
6. Soon came the Division Bench decision of Bombay High Court in Maruti Sharipati Dubai v. State of Maharashtra, (1987) Crl. L J 743, in which the Bench speaking through Swant, J., as he then was, on being approached for quashing a prosecution launched against the petitioner under Section 309 of the Penal Code on the ground of unconstitutionally of the section, took the view and that the section was ultra vires being violative of Article 14 and 21 and was therefore struck down. We should not the reasons for the view taken later.
7. Close on the heels was the decision of a Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in C. Jagadeeswar v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (1983) Crl. L J 549, in which on the High Court being approached against the conviction of the appellants under Section 309, inter alia, on the ground of the section being violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution, the Bench held that the section was valid as it did not offend any of these articles. The Bombay view was dissented to; the reasons of which also we shall advert later.
8. The unreported decision of the Delhi High Court has been noted in the articles of Sri BB Pandey, Reader in Law. University of Delhi, as published in Islamic and comparative Law Quarterly, Volume II (1) March, 1987 at page 112 to 120, and of Sri Faizan Mustafa, Lecturer, Department of Law, Aligarh Muslim University, at pages 36 to 42 of 1993 1 SCJ, Journal section. That decision was rendered in a suo motu proceeding titled as "Court on its own Motion v. Yogesh Sharma" and registered as Crl. Revision No. 230/85. The decision was rendered by Sachar, C.J. The Court once again pointed out to the futility of creating criminal liability in suicide cases, but instead of striking down the section or declaring it invalid, what the learned Chief Justice did was to quash all the 119 proceedings pending in the trial Courts on the ground that dragging of the prosecutions for years when the victims have had enough of misery and the accused also belonged to poorer section which added further insult to the injury, would be abuse of the process of the court. Being of this view, each of the accused was directed to be acquitted.
9. Striking down of the section by the Bombay High Court has come to be criticised by the aforesaid Shri Pandey and Shri Mustafa, so also by Shri DD Pandey, Research Professor, Indian Law Institute, in his article on "Criminal Law", as at pages 260 to 270 of Vol. 23 (1987) of Annual Survey of India Law, published by the Indian Law Institute. In the 'Editorial Note' titled 'Taking one's Life', as published at pages 37 to 40 of (1986) 91 CWN , the Bombay decision received some criticism.
10. Before dealing with the points raised in those writings, it would be worthwhile to note that Shri VS Deshpande after his retirement as Chief Justice of Delhi High Court had expressed his view on this question in his article titled "To be or not to be" printed at pages 10 to 15 of the Journal part of 1984 (3) SCC. Shri Deshpande, after referring to what had been held by this Court regarding the scope of Article 21, took the view that if Section 309 is restricted in its application to attempt to commit suicide which are cowardly and which are unworthy, then only this section would be in consonance with Article 21, because, if a person having had no duties to perform to himself or to others when he is terminally ill, decides to end his life and relieve himself from the pain of living and the others from the burden of looking after him, prosecution of such a person would be adding insult to injury and it was asked "Should a Court construe Section 309 IPC to apply to such cases?"
11. Some time afterwards appeared an article of Justice R.A. Jahagirdar of Bombay High Court in the Illustrated Weekly of India (September 29, 1985) in which the learned Judge took the view that Section 309 was unconstitutional for four reasons : (1) neither academicians nor jurists are agreed on what constitutes suicide, much less attempted suicide; (2) mens rea, without which to offence can be sustained, is not clearly discernible in such acts; (3) temporary insanity is the ultimate reason of such acts which is a valid defence even in homicides; and (4) individuals driven to suicide require psychiatric care.
12. Apart from the aforesaid judicial and legal thinking on the subject relating to justification and permissibility of punishing a man for attempting to commit suicide, there are proponents of the view that euthanasia (Mercy Killing) should be permitted by law. We do not propose to refer to the thinking on this subject, principally because the same is beyond the scope of the present petitions and also because in euthanasia a third person is either actively or passively involved about whom it may be said that he aids or abets the killing of another person. We propose to make a distinction between a attempt of a person to take his life and action of some others to bring to an end the life of a third person. Such a distinction can be made on principle and is conceptually permissible.
13. Though what we propose to decide in these cases would, there fore, relate to the offence of attempted suicide, it is nonetheless required to be stated that euthanasia is not much unrelated to the act of committing suicide inasmuch as wherever passive euthanasia has been held to permissible under the law, one of the requirements insisted is consent of the patient or of his relations in case the patient be not in a position to give voluntary consent. The relationship between suicide and euthanasia is come to be highlighted in a decision of the Supreme Court of Nevada (one of the States of United States of America) in Mokay v. Berastedt, where a patient filed a petition to the Court for permitting disconnection of his respirator. The District Court, on the facts of the case, granted permission. The State appealed to the Supreme Court of Nevada who, after balancing the interest of the patient against the relevant State interest, affirmed the District Courts' judgment. The Court took the view that the desire of the patient for withdrawal of his respirator did not tantamount to suicide - the same was rather an exercise of his constitutional and common law right to discontinue unwanted medical treatment. This was the view taken by the majority. One of the Judges expressed dissenting view.
14. A comment has been made on the aforesaid decision at pages 829 to 838 of Suffolk University Law Review, Volume 25 (1991) by stating that the distinction made by the majority between suicide and euthanasia because of differences in motive and mental attitude, is not tenable and the Commentator referred to the dissenting opinion in which it was observed that the patient was in fact requesting the court to sanction affirmative act which was entirely consistent with the court's definition of suicide, inasmuch as the majority had defined suicide as "an act or instance of taking one's own life voluntarily and intentionally; the deliberate and intentional destruction of his own life by a person of years of discretion and so sound mound; one that commits or attempts his self-murder." (This was indeed the definition given in Webster's Third New International Dictionary, 1968).
15. We may not note the reasons given by the Bombay High Court in Shripati's case (supra) for striking down the section as violation of Article 21. These reasons are basically three: (1) Article 21 has conferred a positive right to live which carries with it the negative right not to live. In this connection it has been first stated that the fundamental rights are to be read together as held in AC. Cooper v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0074/1970 : [1971]1SCR512 . Mention was then made of freedom of speech and expression, as to which it was observed that the same includes freedom not to speak and to remain silent. Similarly, about the freedom of business and occupation, it was stated that it includes freedom not to do business. (2) Notice was then taken of the various causes which lead people to commit suicide. These being mental diseases and imbalances, unbearable physical ailments, affliction by socially dreaded diseases, decrepit physical condition disabling the person from taking normal care of his body and performing the normal chores, the loss of all senses or of desire for the pleasures of any of the senses, extremely cruel unbearable conditions of life making it painful to live, a sense of shame or disgrace or a need to defend one's honour or a sheer loss of interest in life or disenchantment with it, or a sense of fulfilment of the purpose for which one was born with nothing more left to do or to be achieved and a genuine urge to quit the world at the proper moment. (3) The Bench thereafter stated that in our country different forms of suicide are known. These being: Johars (mass suicides or self-immolation) of ladies from the royal houses to avoid being dishonoured by the enemies; Sati (self-immolation by the widow on the burning pyre of her deceased husband); Samadhi (termination of one's life by self-restraint on breathing); Prayopaveshan (Starving unto death); and Atmarpana (self-sacrifice). It was also observed that the saints and savants, social, political and religious leaders have immolated themselves in the past and do so even today by one method or the other and society has not only not disapproved of the practice but has eulogized and commemorated the practitioners. It may be pointed out that the Bench made a distinction between "suicide" and "mercy-killing"; so also, between suicide and aiding or abetting the same.
16. The Bombay High Court held Section 309 as violation of Article 14 also mainly because of two reasons. First, which act or acts in series of acts will constitute attempt to suicide, where to draw the line, is not know - some attempts may be serious while other non-serious. It was stated that in fact philosophers, moralists and sociologists were not agreed upon what constituted suicide. The want of plausible definition or even guidelines, made Section 309 arbitrary as per the learned Judges. Another reason given was that Section 309 treats all attempts to commit suicide by the same measure without referring to the circumstances in which attempts are made.
17. The first of the aforesaid reasons is not sound, according to us, because whatever differences there may be as to what constitutes suicide, there is no doubt that suicide is intentional taking of one's life, as stated at page 1521 of Encyclopaedia of Crime and Justice, Volume IV, 1983 Edn. Of course, there still exists difference among suicide researchers as to what constitute suicidal behaviour, for example, whether narcotic addiction, chronic alcoholism, heavy cigarette smoking, reckless driving, other risk taking behaviors are suicidal or not. It may also be that different methods are adopted in committing suicide, for example, use of fire arms, poisoning especially by drugs, over doses, hanging, inhalation of gas. Even so, suicide is capable of a broad definition, as has been given in the aforesaid Webster's Dictionary. Further, on a prosecution being launched it is always open to an accused to take the plea that his act did not constitute suicide whereupon the Court would decide this aspect also.
18. In so far as treating of different attempts to commit suicide by the same measure is concerned, the same also cannot be regarded as violative of Article 14, inasmuch as the nature, gravity and extent of attempt may be taken care of by tailoring the sentence appropriately. It is worth pointing out that Section 309 has only provided the maximum sentence which is upto one year. It provides for imposition of fine only as a punishment. It is this aspect which weighed with the Division bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in its aforesaid decision to disagree with the Bombay view by stating that in certain cases even Probation of Offenders Act can be pressed into service, whose Section 12 enables the Court to ensure that no stigma or disqualification is attached to such a person, (see para 32 of the judgment).
19. We agree with the view taken by the Andhra Pradesh High Court as regards Section 309 qua Article 14. But the Bombay Bench itself was more involved with Article 21 and violation of it by Section 309, the reasons whereof have been noted. Whether these are sound and tenable, would be our real consideration.
20. The Bombay High Court' decision led some thinkers to express their own views. We have noted who they were. The broad points of their objection/criticism were these: (1) suicide is an act against religion; (2) it is immoral; (3) produces adverse sociological effect; (4) it is against public policy (this has also been the main argument of the counsel of Union of India before us); (5) it damages monopolistic Power of the State, as State alone can take life; and (6) it would encourage aiding and abetting of suicide and may ever lead to 'constitutional cannibalism'.
21. We shall in due course see whether the aforesaid objections raised against the Bombay judgment are valid. Concerned as we are with the broad contention that Section 309 in violative of Article 21, we shall first inform ourselves as to the content and reach of this Article and then answer in a general way as to whether a person residing in India has a right to die. Section 309 being a part of our enacted law, we would desire to know what object a law seeks to achieve. This section having made attempt to commit suicide an offence, we shall ask the question as to why is a particular act treated as crime and what acts are so treated. We shall then apply our mind to the purposeful query as to how a crime came can be prevented. Being seized with the crime of 'attempted suicide', we shall apprise ourselves as to why suicides are committed and how can they be really prevented. We would also desire to know what type of person have been committing suicides and what has been their motivations. We would then view the act of committing suicide in the background of our accepted social ethos. Having done so, we shall take up the points of criticism noted above one. by one and express our views on the same.
22. Having known that the Law Commission of India had in its 42nd Report of 1971 recommended deletion of Section 309, we shall put on record as to why was this recommendation made and how was the same viewed by the Central Government; and what steps, if any, were taken by it to implement the recommendation. What is the present thinking of the Union of India shall also be taken note of.
23. Finally, we shall open our mental window a little to allow breeze to come from other parts of the world, inter alia, because Gurudev (Rabindranath Tagore, the Noble laureate) Wanted us to do so. Globalisation has, in any case, been accepted by us in some other fields of our activities. We have stated opening of this window "a little" because we propose to confine ourselves to known whether attempt to commit suicide is presently a crime only in two other countries of the globe - they being United Kingdom and United States of America. The reasons of our selecting these two countries shall be indicated when we shall advert to our 'global view" query. It may only be stated here that we are opening the window only a little, as, the little air that would pass through the little aperture would be enough, in our view, to enable us to have broad knowledge of global view on the subject under consideration.
24. The aforesaid mental odyssey would take us through a long path before we would reach our destination, our conclusion. Finale would, however, come after we have answered or known the following :
(1) Has Article 21 any positive content or is it merely negative in its reach?
(2) Has a person residing in India a right to die?
(3) Why is a Law enacted? What object (s) it seeks achieve?
(4) Why is a particular act treated as crime? When acts are so treated?
(5) How can crime be prevented?
(6) Why is suicide committed?
(7) Who commits suicide? Secularisation of suicide.
(8) How suicide-borne persons should be dealt with?
(9) Is suicide a non-religious act?
(10) Is suicide immoral?
(11) Does suicide produce adverse sociological effects?
(12) Is suicide against public policy?
(13) Does commission of suicide damage the monopolistic power of the State to take life?
(14) Is apprehension of 'constitutional cannibalism' justified?
(15) Recommendation of the Law Commission of India and follow up steps taken, it any.
(16) Global view : What is the legal position in other leading countries of the world regarding the matter at hand?
25. The aforesaid questions, which have been framed keeping in mind the information we thought necessary to enable us to decide the important matter at hand to our satisfaction, have been listed as above keeping in view their comparative importance for our purpose - the most important being the first and so on; and we propose to answer them in the same sequence.
(1) Has Article 21 any positive content or is it merely negative in its reach ?
26. This question is no longer res Integra inasmuch as a Constitution Bench of this Court in Unnikrishan v. State of Andhra Pradesh MANU/SC/0333/1993 : [1993]1SCR594 (in which right to receive education upto the primary stage has been held to be a call of Article 21) has virtually answered this question. This would be apparent from what was stated by Mohan, J. in paragraph 19 and by Jeevan Reddy, J; in paragraph 170. In paragraph 30, Mohan, J. has mentioned about the rights which have been held to be covered under Article 21. These being :
(1) The right to go abroad. Satwant Singh Sawhney v. D. Ramarath- nam APO, New Delhi.
(2) The right to privacy. Govind v. State of MP., In this case reliance was placed on the American decision in Griswold v. Connecticut.
(3) The right against solitary confinement. Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration.
(4) The right against the fetters. Charles Shobraj v. Supdt. Central Jail.
(5) The right to legal aid. M.H. Hoaskot v. State of Maharashtra.
(6) The right to speedy trial. Hussainara Khatoon v. Home Secretary, State of Bihar.
(7) The right against handcuffing. Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Administration.
(8) The right against delayed execution. T.V. Vatheeswaran, v. State of T.N.
(9) The right against custodial violence. Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra.
(10) The right against public hanging. A. G. of India v. Lachma Devi.
(11) Doctor's assistance. Paramanand Katra v. Union of India.
(12) Shelter. Shantistar Builders v. NK Totame.