MANU/SC/0019/2004
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 4294 and 4295 of 1998
Decided On: 06.01.2004
Appellants: People's Union for Civil Liberties and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
V.N. Khare, C.J. and S.B. Sinha, J.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Prashant Bhushan, Vishal Gupta, Sanjiv Sen, Nandini Gore, Sanjay Parikh, Meghna Sati and Manik Karanjawala, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: Soli J. Sorabjee, Attorney General, Dipankar P. Gupta, Sr. Adv., Manish Singhvi, Prateek Jalan, Pritish Kapoor, Y.P. Mahajan, Shreekant N. Terdal, P.H. Parekh, Sameer Parekh, Anil Shrivastav and Jyoti Dutt, Advs., D.S. Mahra, (NP), Sushma Suri (NP) and P. Parmeswaran, (NP), Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Law of Evidence
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 13, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 14, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 16, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 17, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 18, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 2(a), Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 23, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 27, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 3, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 30, Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 5; Constitution Of India - Article 10, Constitution Of India - Article 13(1)(a), Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(a), Constitution Of India - Article 19(2), Constitution Of India - Article 19(i)(a), Constitution Of India - Article 226; Indian Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 123, Indian Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 162, Indian Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 166
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 19; Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Section 27
Cases Referred:
State of U.P. v. Raj Narain and Ors., MANU/SC/0032/1975; S.P. Gupta v. Union of India and Anr., MANU/SC/0080/1981; Dinesh Trivedi, M.P. and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/1138/1997; Union of India v. Association for Democratic Reforms and Anr., MANU/SC/0394/2002; Hamdard Dawakhana and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors., MANU/SC/0016/1959; Krishna Mohan (P) Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi, MANU/SC/0539/2003; Organon (India) Ltd. (now known as Infar (India) Ltd. and Anr. v. Collector of Excise and Ors., MANU/SC/0507/1994; Harishankar Bagla v. State of M.P., MANU/SC/0063/1954; Delhi Laws Act case, MANU/SC/0010/1951; State of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone, MANU/SC/0394/1981; Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Private Ltd. and Ors. etc. v. Union of India and Ors.,MANU/SC/0406/1984 ; Lord Simon of Glaisdale in Attorney-General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. (1973) 3 All ER 54; Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India and Ors. v. Cricket Association of Bengal and Ors., MANU/SC/0246/1995; Zenul v. Rusk 14 L.Ed. 2 179; Kleindienst v. Mandal, 33 Law. Ed. 2d 683; United States v. Richardson, 41 L. Ed. 2d 678
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.1.97 of the Bombay High Court in W.P. Nos. 1785 and 1792 of 1996
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Dissented
  1

Distinguished
  2

Relied On
  12

Case Note:
Constitution of India - Articles 19(2) and 226; Atomic Energy Act, 1962 - Sections 18, 18(1) - Radiation Protection Rules, 1971; Atomic Energy (Working of Mines, Minerals and Handling of Prescribed Substances) Rules; Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal and Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987; Atomic Energy (Factories) Rules, 1996; Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1996 - Right of Information - Power of Government to impose reasonable restrictions in interest of State - Validity of - Appellant filed writ petition for disclosure of information from respondents relating to purported safety violation and defects in nuclear installations and power plants - Demand of information made on basis of information in AERB's report documenting safety defects and weaknesses citing 130 instances - Central Government issued an order under Section 18 of Act, restricting disclosure of information - Petitioners claimed right to access to copies of AERB report and challenged Section 18 of Act as ultra vires Constitution of India having conferred unguided, uncanalised or wide power in exercise of discretion in notifying a document as Secret Document - Dismissed by High Court holding that AERB's report being classified as "Secret" as pertaining to nuclear installations in country if directed to be published would cause irreparable injury to interest of State and would be prejudicial to National Security - Appeal to Supreme Court - Dismissing appeal held that a reasonable restriction on the exercise of right is always permissible in the interest of the security of State - In order to claim immunity from disclosure of unpublished state documents, documents must relate to affairs of state and disclosure there of must be against interest of State or public interest - As operation and functioning of a nuclear plant being sensitive in nature, any information relating to training features processes or technology could not be disclosed as it might be vulnerable to sabotage - Order issued by Central Government under Section 18 of Act and its claim of privilege did not suffer from any legal infirmity since in wrong hands information could pose a danger not only to security of State but to public at large - As judgment of High Court not suffering from any legal infirmity, not warranting any interference by Court
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
INTRODUCTION:
1. Right of information is a fundamental right under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. The State under Clause (2) of Article 19 of the Constitution, however, is entitled to impose reasonable restrictions inter alia in the interest of the State. How far and to what extent the same should be balanced is the question involved in these appeals which arise out of judgments and orders dated 30th January, 1997 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition Nos. 1785 and 1792 of 1996.
WRIT PROCEEDINGS:
2. The appellants herein in the said writ petition sought disclosure of information from the respondents relating to purported safety violations and defects in various nuclear installations and power plants across the country including those situated at Trombay and Tarapur. The said demand of information was made purported to be relying on or on the basis of an information that the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) prepared a report in November, 1995 documenting therein safety defects and weaknesses citing 130 instances which are said to be matters of concern. The appellants contended that a former Chairman of the AERB, Dr. Gopalkrishnan also expressed serious concern about the safety of nuclear installations in India disclosing that serious accidents had occurred in some of the nuclear facilities including one at Narora Atomic Power Plant in the State of U.P. and Kaiga Atomic Power Plant situated in the State of Karnataka.
3. The appellants herein in support of its prayers made in the writ petition mainly relied upon the reports appearing in the newspapers, magazines and editorials and articles.
4. In their counter affidavit, the respondents herein inter alia contended that the said Board was constituted in terms of Section 27 of the Atomic Energy Act entrusting the task to develop Safety Codes, Guides and Standards for siting, design construction, commissioning, operating and decommissioning of the different types of plants, keeping in view the international recommendations and local requirements and develop safety policies in both radiation and industrial safety areas; Reviewing health and aspects of modifications in design/ operation involving changes in the technical specification adopted in any of the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) units; Reviewing operational experience in the light of the radiological and other safety criteria Recommended by the International Commission on Radiological /Protection, International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and such other international bodies and adapted to suit Indian conditions, and thereby evolve major safety policies; Prescribing acceptable limits of radiation exposure to occupational workers and members of the public and approve acceptable limits of environmental releases of radioactive substances; reviewing the emergency preparedness plans for non-DAE installations; Promote, research and development efforts for fulfilling the functions and responsibilities specified; Reviewing the training programme, qualifications and licensing policies for personnel by the project/ plants; Enforcing rules and regulations promulgated under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 for radiation safety in the country and such other functions as specified therein.
5. With the said counter affidavit, the Fourth Report of the Nuclear Plant Safety and Spent Fuel Management prepared by the Standing Committee on Atomic Energy consisting of members of both the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha had also been annexed. The Annual Report for the year 1995-96 prepared by the Government of India had also been annexed therewith. It was further contended that the specific questions were asked in the Parliament in relation to the alleged accidents which had been answered. It had been emphasized that necessary legislative and regulatory framework to ensure a competitive and independent assessment of the safety related requirements and practices in all nuclear installations have come into being. The respondents in their affidavits furthermore stated that there had been constant interaction with the media and the public in nuclear safety related matters to instill an increasing level of confidence in the public that safety is indeed receiving topmost priority in all nuclear activities.
6. Dr. A. Gopalkrishanan, a former Chairman of AERB, on whose press statements the writ petition was filed, also in a statement before the reporters of the Economic Times which was published in the said newspaper on 11th February, 1995, stated:
"Let me emphasize that, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board is able to implement their decisions today without any interference or pressures in its functioning from outside sources. The statement of Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru while adverting to certain amendments moved to the Atomic Energy Bill in the year 1948 has also been relied upon."
7. One Mr. G.R. Srinivasan, Director, Health Safety in his affidavit disclosed that out of 130 items in the documents of AERB which required attention, 89 issues directly pertain to Nuclear Power Corporation (NPC) while 6 other issues concerned NPC, ABRC AND DAF.
8. In the said affidavit it was pointed out:
"...that the Atomic Energy Commission informed the 5th Respondent on 22nd November, 1995 of the various issues to be tackled by NPC installations for the NEP's response. By 4th December, 1995, the NPC has given its, over 100 page response to the issue to AEC and thereafter NPC constituted a Committee on 11th December, 1995 to interact and discuss with the AERB regarding devolvement of the said issue. A total of 19 meetings were held with AERB staff and mutually agreed time bound action plans have been arrived at for all 95 issues. Final agreed action plans have been issued on 55 issues, because of degree of urgency. It is pointed out that the question of safety issues in NPC is a document which is highly technical in nature and it would neither be in public interest for the same to be disclosed nor could be it discerned by general public."
9. Yet again Shri Anupam Dasgupta, Joint Secretary in the DAE in his affidavit by way of sub-rejoinder dated 24th January, 1997 contended that the aforementioned 130 items listed in the AERB report titled "Safety Issues in DAE installations" are based on the proceedings and recommendations of various meetings of the Standing Safety Committees which have been constituted by the AERB itself to review the safety nuclear installations on a regular basis. In the said sub-rejoinder a press release of 26th March, 1996 of Dr. A. Gopalkrishnan was annexed wherein it was stated:
"For each of the items identified, the concerned DAE installation and AERB are jointly preparing the preliminary details of corrective actions and a committed time schedule for implementing them. These will be reviewed and finalized by the AERB Safety Review Committees and the Board, for timely implementation thereafter by the DAE. DAE installations are closely co operating with the AERB in expediting the process of safety upgradation."
10. Similarly, Dr. K.S. Parthasarathy in a press release dated 23rd June, 1996 stated:
"In the judgment of the Board, there is at the moment no shortcoming existing which can lead to any nuclear disaster or Chernobyl type catastrophe in any of these installations. The Board would like to assure the public that all the DAE installations are being continuously monitored and that it would not hesitate to initiate restrictive regulatory actions wherever necessary."
11. The respondents, however, relying on or on the basis of a notification dated 4th February, 1975 passed under Sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, raised a plea of privilege in relation to the said report, contending that the same had been classified as 'Secret' as it pertains to the nuclear installations in the country which includes several sensitive facilities carried out therein involving activities of highly classified nature.
12. In the said affidavit, it was averred that the deponent had applied his mind and found that the documents satisfy the requirements of the Order dated 4th February, 1975 read with Section 18 of the Act as if the same is directed to be published would cause irreparable injury to the interest of the State as also would be prejudicial to the national security.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
13. The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 ('the Act') was enacted to, provide for the development, control and use of atomic energy for the welfare of the people of India and for other peaceful purposes and for matters connected therewith. Section 2(a) of then Act defines "atomic energy" to mean energy released from atomic nuclei as a result of any process, including the fission and fusion processes. The relevant provisions of the said Act are as under :
2(b). "Fissile material." means uranium 233, uranium 235, plutonium or any material containing these substances or any other material that may be declared as such by notification by the Central Government;
2(e). "plant" includes machinery, equipment or appliance, whether affixed to land or not;
2(h). "radiation" means gamma rays, X-rays and rays consisting of alpha particles, beta particles, neutrons, protons and other nuclear and sub-atomic particles; but not sound or radio waves, or visible, infra-red or ultra-violet light;
2(i). "radioactive substance" or "radioactive material" means any substance or material which spontaneously emits radiation in excess of the levels prescribed by notification by the Central Government."
14. Section 3 provides for the general powers of the Central Government which include:
(a) to produce, develop, use and dispose of atomic energy either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company and carry out research into any matters connected therewith;
(b) to manufacture of otherwise produce any prescribed or radioactive substance and any articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for, or in connection with, the production, development or use of atomic energy or such research as aforesaid and to dispose of such prescribed or radioactive substance or any articles manufactured or otherwise produced;
(bb) (i) to buy or otherwise acquire, store and transport any prescribed or radioactive substance and any articles which in its opinion are, or are likely to be, required for, or in connection with, the production, development or use of atomic energy; and
(ii) to dispose of such prescribed or radioactive substance or any articles bought or otherwise acquired by it, either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it, or a Government company;]
(c) to declare as "restricted information" any information not so far published or otherwise made public relating to--
(i) the location, quality and quantity of prescribed substances and transactions for their acquisition, whether by purchase or otherwise, or disposal, whether by sale or otherwise;
(ii) the processing of prescribed substances and the extraction or production of fissile materials from them;
(iii) the theory, design, construction and operation of plants for the treatment and production of any of the prescribed substances and for the separation of isotopes;
(iv) the theory, design, construction and operation of nuclear reactors;
(v) research and technological work on materials and process involved in or derived from items (i) to (iv);
(d) to declare as "prohibited area" any area or premises where work including research, design or development is carried on in respect of the production, treatment, use, application or disposal of atomic energy or of any prescribed substance;
(e) to provide for control over radioactive substances or radiation generating plant in order to--
(i) prevent radiation hazards;
(ii) secure public safety and safety of persons handling radioactive substances or radiation generating plant; and
(iii) ensure safe disposal of radioactive wastes:
(f) to provide for the production and supply of electricity from atomic energy and for taking measures conducive to such production and supply and for all matters incidental thereto either by itself or through any authority or corporation established by it or a Government company and
(g) to do all such things (including the erection of buildings and execution of works and the working of minerals) as the Central Government considers necessary or expedient for the exercise of the foregoing powers."
15. Section 16 provides for control over radioactive substances. Section 17 provides for the rule making power of the Central Government by making special provisions as to safety. Section 18 of the Act reads as under:
"18. Restriction on disclosure of information.--
(1) The Central Government may by order restrict the disclosure of information, whether contained in a document, drawing photograph, plan, model, or in any other form whatsoever, which relates to, represents or illustrates--
(a) an existing or proposed plant used or proposed to be used for the purpose of producing, developing or using atomic energy, or
(b) the purpose or method of operation of any such existing or proposed plant, or
(c) any process operated or proposed to be operated in any such existing or proposed plant.
(2) No person shall--
(a) disclose, or obtain or attempt to obtain any information restricted under Sub-section (1), or
(b) disclose, without the authority of the Central Government, any information obtained in the discharge of any functions under this Act or in the performance of his official duties.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply--
(i) to the disclosure of information with respect to any plant of a type in use for purposes other than the production, development or use of atomic energy, unless the information discloses that plant of that type is used or proposed to be used for the production, development or use of atomic energy or research into any matters connected therewith; or
(ii) where any information has been made available to the general public otherwise than in contravention of this section, to any subsequent disclosure of that information.
16. Section 27 of the Act empowers the Central Government to set up Atomic Energy Regulatory Board.
17. Pursuant to or in furtherance of the rule making power contained in Section 30 of the Act, the following rules have been framed:
(i) Radiation Protection Rules, 1971
(ii) Atomic Energy (Working of Mines, Minerals and Handling of Prescribed Substances) Rules.
(iii) Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal and Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987
(iv) Atomic Energy (Factories) Rules, 1996
(v) Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1996.
STATUTORY BODIES:
18. It is not in dispute that the Atomic Energy Commission is constituted by the Union, of India in terms of the provisions of the Act. The Central Government has issued a notification dated 11th July, 2003 reconstituting the Atomic Energy Commission with the following composition:
19. It is also not in dispute that the Central Government In exercise of its power conferred upon it under Section 27 of the Act, had set up the Board to enforce certain regulatory and safety measures envisaged under Sections 16, 17 and 23 of the Act. The composition of the Board include:
HIGH COURT JUDGMENT:
20. Before the High Court the following three contentions were raised by the appellants:
(i) the citizens have a right to have access to the copies of the AERB report;
(ii) Section 18 of the Atomic Energy Act is invalid on the ground that there are no guidelines for the exercise of discretion in notifying a document as a Secret document; and
(iii) an Independent regulatory Body to replace AERB should be appointed to monitor the safety measures taken in the nuclear power plants.
21. The High Court although took notice of 'the horror of the nuclear holocaust which the world first felt when the America Bomber, Enola Gay descended from the clouds and emptied its bowels on the city of Hiroshima' but refused to look in to the AERB Report itself upon arriving at a satisfaction that the respondents had been acting in public interest as also the interest of the nuclear installations in the country stating:
"1. Admittedly, these questions are repeatedly considered by the Parliament, it is discussed in the Parliament and once the Parliament is taking appropriate decision on the safety and other aspects of the Nuclear Installations, it would not be proper for this Court to exercise its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution;
2. As stated earlier, the Memorandum dated 7th January, 1997 is issued by the Prime Minister to look into all aspect of the present regulatory process and as pointed out by the learned Additional Solicitor General, this would include the consideration of 130 defects/ irregularities pointed out in the AERB report. This Committee constituted consists of experts in the field;
3. It has been pointed out that the hierarchy in the Department of Atomic Energy monitors the running of the Plants and Nuclear Installations; and
4. Further, the steps taken for reviewing 130 safety issues in the DAE Installation by the Committee cannot be subject matter of judicial review.."
22. As regard the question of vires of certain provisions of the Act and in particular Sections 13 and 18 thereof, the High Court held that there are guidelines both in Sections 18 and 3 of the Atomic Energy Act in terms whereof the Central Government has been conferred with the power to restrict information as in wrong hands the same can pose a danger not only to the security of the State but to the public at large. It also rejected the contention that only because the nuclear plants are carrying out commercial activities, a citizen has a right to know stating:
"...Nuclear Power Plants as a by product generate plutonium which is a radioactive metal used in Nuclear Research amongst others for preparation of Atom Bomb. If the defects and the remedies to cure the defects in the Nuclear Power Plants fall in the wrong hands it can pose danger to the security of the nation itself. The challenge, therefore, on that count must fail."
23. The High Court opined that the very fact that AERB has prepared the report is suggestive of the fact that it is alive to its duties.
SUBMISSIONS:
24. Mr. Prashant Bhushan, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants would submit that the right of information is a part of the fundamental right in terms of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India, and, thus, the citizens of India could not be denied the requisite informations sought for. He would urge that for the purpose of ensuring that appropriate safety standards are maintained by the nuclear plants and the radiations which occurred in normal course and/ or duty accidents as well as nuclear wastes, it is important that the guidelines/ norms/ safeguards taken by the nuclear plants towards not only the workers employed therein but also the general public should be disclosed. Such informations, Mr. Prashant Bhushan would contend, to a section of citizens and particularly those who are experts in the field would enable them to highlight the safety deficiencies obtaining in such plants and, if necessary, to get a public opinion formed against such installations. In a democracy, it is fundamental, according to Mr. Prashant Bhushan, that all vital informations relating to the governance of the country be disclosed so as to enable the citizenry of India to ascertain their right of information as to whether the international standards relating to safety are being maintained or not.
25. Relying upon or on the basis of the decisions of this Court in State of U.P. v. Raj Narain and Ors. MANU/SC/0032/1975 : [1975]3SCR333 , S.P. Gupta v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0080/1981 : [1982]2SCR365 , Dinesh, Trivedi, M.P. and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/1138/1997 : [1997]3SCR93 and Union of India v. Association for Democratic Reforms and Anr. MANU/SC/0394/2002 : [2002]3SCR696 , the learned counsel would submit that the provisions contained in Section 18 of the Act are not valid law imposing reasonable restriction on such freedom in the interest of the State. Drawing our attention to several Articles, the learned counsel would contend that reluctance on the part of the authorities of the plants to disclose any information purported to be in terms of the order made under Section 18 of the Act do not sub-serve any public interest. Mr. Prashant Bhushan would argue that from a perusal of the aforementioned articles, it would appear that various irregularities have been committed as regard strict enforcement and/or compliance of safety regulations not only resulting in accidents but also receiving radiations beyond the permissible limits by the workmen. The learned counsel would contend that the power plants of the country in the matter of discharge of nuclear radiations do not fulfill the requirements of the IAEA Standards. A large number of accidents, Mr. Prashant Bhushan would urge, occurring in the said plants also had gone unreported.
26. Mr. Bhushan would submit that the information as regard design and other details of the plants are available on Internet and, thus, there does not exist any, reason as to why the other relevant informations should be withheld only on the spacious plea of likelihood of sabotage as a result whereof an important right of a citizen to know about vital informations like safety of the workers as also the people living nearby has been denied. It was urged that in any event those parts of the report which do not satisfy the secrecy of the State test should be disclosed.
27. Drawing our attention to Section 18 of the said Act, the learned counsel would submit that as thereby unguided, unbridled and wide power had been conferred upon the Central Government, the same must be held to be ultra vires the Constitution of India.
28. Mr. Soli Sorabjee, learned Attorney General appearing on behalf of the Union of India, on the other hand, would urge that from the affidavits filed before the High Court it would appear that hardly any accident of serious nature had taken place in India. Mr. Sorabjee would submit that right of information as contained in Clause (a) of Clause (1) of Article 19 is subject to reasonable restrictions contained in Clause (2) thereof. The right of information, it was contended, cannot be exercised in abstract and must be considered in the context in which such right is being claimed. A matter which is sensitive by its very character, the learned Attorney General would argue, cannot be subject matter of a right of information. Drawing our attention to a chart, the learned counsel would submit that the Central Government as also the AERB are aware of the safety measures required to be taken. The AERB. Mr. Sorabjee would submit, being consisting of eminent persons who are generally independent not, only monitor the working of the plants but also take strict measures as regards safety operations thereof.
29. The learned Attorney General, citing the following example;
"A single pump could handle the cooling operations for a reactor. Normally, there are two pumps, so that even if one fails the other could do the job. However, in view of the fact that this is a safety-critical component, a safety recommendation could be to have a third pump. Or replacement of Inlet Manifold, or replacement of Emergency Condenser Tube."
contended that the report of the A.E.R.B. contains such suggestion which cannot be termed as deficiencies.
30. The learned Attorney General would argue that if the report is disclosed, the knowledge of the data containing therein pertaining to inventories and contents of spent fuel, reprocessing waste, etc., gathered therefrom could facilitate a reverse calculation about the country's nuclear programme potential in furtherance whereof the enemies of the nation would be able to estimate and monitor the strategic activities of the plants. It was urged that no radioactive waste is disposed of and the same is recycled.
31. Mr. Dipankar Gupta, the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 5th respondent drew our attention to various affidavits affirmed by the High Court and submitted that from a perusal thereof it would appear that the necessary disclosures of information have already been made. The learned counsel would submit that if the AERB itself has brought the report into existence the same would show in no unmistakable terms that they are alive to the realities. The Courts, Mr. Dipankar Gupta would urge, would intervene only in a case where the statutory bodies are not active and the same being not the case the impugned judgment need not be interfered with.
The Board:
32. AERB is a statutory body. The following are its functions :
(i) The jurisdiction of AERB covers installations such as nuclear power stations, nuclear fuel fabrication, heavy water plants, uranium mines, thorium processing units etc. and all installations in which radiation is used for medical, industrial or research purposes (except Bhabha Atomic Research center and its facilities, due to their special nature).
(ii) AERB is manned by some of the nation's top experts in the relevant fields. It is also supported by various experts belonging to reputed academic institutions and other government agencies. AERB thus draws on the expertise and knowledge-base available all over the country.
(iii) The Board issues different authorizations at each stage such as siting, construction, commissioning operating and decommissioning of nuclear plants and installations. The AERB licenses nuclear engineers at different levels, such as Reactor Operator, Shift Charge Engineers, Control Engineers, etc. Units are permitted to function only if the stipulated number of licensed personnel are available in every shift.
(iv) Apart from the Safety Committees of the units concerned, AERB, has evolved a multi-disciplinary 3-tier safety review procedure to enforce safety stipulations in nuclear installations. The first tier is at the plant level; the next at the Specialists' Committees level; and the third at the Board level.
(v) The Board has set up 2 Specialists' Committees: the Safety Review Committee for Operating Plants (SARCOP) and the Safety Review Committee for Applications of Radiation (SARCAR). These consist of scientists and technologists from different disciplines SARCOP deals with operating plants of the Department, and SARCAR deals with radiation installations for medical, industrial and research purposes. The specialists' committees meet regularly to review the safety status.
(vi) The AERB itself has 7 Technical Divisions, with over a hundred full-time scientists, engineers and technologists with wide experience and expertise in their relevant fields. AERB has also set up its own Safety Research Institute at Kalpakkam.
(vii)AERB uses many inputs to assess the safety status of the plants/ installations. These include reports of inspection by AERB staff, radiation dose records and environmental monitoring reports.
(viii) Each nuclear installation has an independent Health Physics set-up to constantly monitor the radiation dose to workers, and also an Environmental Survey Laboratory which continuously collects thousands of samples of food, water, air and sediment to monitor radioactivity releases to the environment.
(ix) AERB has prescribed limits for discharges and ensures that the radiation releases are well within the prescribed limits. The limits prescribed are based on international recommendations, and in all cases are either equal to or more stringent than these.
(x) Apart from this standard procedure, AERB can also act suo moto, or on a complaint from a bona fide member of the public.
(xi) As part of the Public Information Programme, AERB issues a quarterly Newsletter, and an Annual Report. Based on the continuous evaluation of the safety status of nuclear power plants, extracts of relevant records are published in the Annual Report of the AERB. Press releases on the regulatory activities of AERB are issued periodically.
33. It is not in dispute that the President by a notification dated 15th November, 1983 issued under Section 27 of the Atomic Energy Act constituted the AERB. It being a statutory body has the powers to lay down the safety standards and frame rules and regulations under the Act as regard the regulatory and/or safety aspects of the installations generating electrical energy. Here to before we have noticed the duties and functions of the Board which are of varying nature. The Board is an independent, body and out of the present composition thereof except one Mr. Sharma, nobody is an employee of the Central Government. The Board is responsible to the Atomic Energy Commission which has been reconstituted by reason of a notification dated 11th July, 2003. The executive function of the Board is vested in its Chairman. From a perusal of the powers and functions of the Board, it is neither in doubt nor in dispute that the Board except for Bhabha Atomic Research center monitors and reviews the working of all nuclear installations in India inter alia with reference to safety aspects. It upgrades and amends the safety standards and procedures and prescribes, and supervises implementation of such standards and procedures by the management of the nuclear installations. It is also not in dispute that safety issues in DAE installations has been prepared by the Board based on the recommendations of various Safety Review Committees. They had all along been classified as "Secret". The report pertains to the nuclear installations in the country which, according to the respondents, include several sensitive facilities carrying out the activities of highly classified nature. The Board, make periodic assessment of the safety status of the installations and its suggestions as regard modifications and improvements to upgrade their safety status to the maximum extent are implemented.
A.E.R.B. REPORT :
34. As regards, the Annual Report 1995-96 of AERB which was the subject matter of the writ petition it has been stated in the counter affidavit that they can be classified in four categories:
Category 1: Hardware related issues leading to replacement of defective components;
Category 2: Ageing relating issues;
Category 3: Confidence building exercises involving some analytical studies;
Category 4: Upgradation of safety standards in plants that have been built to earlier safety standards.
VIRES OF SECTION 18 OF THE ACT :
35. The contentions raised by the parties as regard non-disclosure of the report are required to be determined in the aforementioned context. Section 18 of the Act contains an enabling provision. Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said provision, the Central Government has issued an order on or about 4th February, 1975 restricting disclosure of certain information mentioned therein except with the prior permission of the Central Government.
36. The question as to whether a statute is ultra vires Constitution of India having conferred unguided, uncanalised or wide power cannot be determined in vacuum. It has to be considered having regard to the text and context of the State as also the character thereof. It deals with a sensitive subject.
37. Section 18 has been enacted for the purposes specified therein. It is well-settled that guidelines for enacting the said provision must be found out from the subject matter covering the field. For the said purpose even the preamble of the Act may be looked into.
38. The notification of discovery of uranium or thorium, control over mining operations, the disposal of uranium, power to obtain information are within the scope and ambit of the said Act. Section 13 provides for informations as regard, contracts. Section 14 postulates control over production and use of atomic energy. Restrictions as regard disclosure of information as contained in Section 18 are not vague or wide in nature. It specifies the areas where such disclosures are prohibited. The powers of the Central Government to make an order in terms thereof are, thus, limited.
39. It is not a case where as in Hamdard Dawakhana and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0016/1959 : 1960CriLJ671 or Krishna Mohan (P) Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi MANU/SC/0539/2003 : AIR2003SC2935 the Central Government has been conferred with a wide uncanalised and unguided power. It is also not a case where the words employed in the provision provide for no criteria nor can it be said that no standard has been laid down by the Parliament therefore. It is furthermore not a case where principles on which the power of the Central Government are to be exercised have not been disclosed. By reason of the Act, essential legislative functions have also not been delegated.
40. We do not think that having regard to the purport and object of the said Act, the provisions of Section 18 have bestowed unguided and uncanalised powers on the Central Government. Sections 18 and 3 of the Atomic Energy Act had to be enacted by the Parliament as in wrong hands the information can pose a danger not only to the security of the State but to the public at large.
41. Reference, in this connection, may be made to a decision of this Court in Organon (India) Ltd. (now known as Infar (India) Ltd. and Anr. v. Collector of Excise and Ors. MANU/SC/0507/1994 : AIR1994SC2489 wherein this Court relying on Harishankar Bagla v. State of M.P. MANU/SC/0063/1954 : 1954CriLJ1322 , Delhi Laws Act case MANU/SC/0010/1951 : [1951]2SCR747 and State of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone MANU/SC/0394/1981 : [1981]2SCR742 , wherein this held that the provisions of Opium Act furnished sufficient guidance in the matter of making rules under Section 5 thereof.
42. The statutory scheme contained in the provisions of the Act, the rules framed thereunder, composition of the Atomic Energy Commission and AERB leave no manner of doubt that the effective functions of the nuclear power plants are sensitive in nature. The functions of the Board are varied and wide. Only out of certain functions of the Board, some have been marked as "Secret" which fulfilled the statutory criteria laid down under Section 18 of the Act. A statute carries with it a presumption of constitutionality. Such a presumption extends also in relation to a law which has been enacted for imposing reasonable restrictions in the fundamental right.
43. A further presumption may also be drawn that the statutory authority would not exercise the power arbitrarily.
44. We are, therefore, of the opinion that Section 18 is not unconstitutional and a valid piece of legislation.
RIGHT OF INFORMATION:
45. Right of information is a facet of 'speech and expression' as contained in Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. Right of information, thus, indisputably is a fundamental right.
46. In 1948, the United Nations proclaimed a Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was followed by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ratified in 1978). Article 19 of the Covenant declares that "everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; the right includes freedom to hold opinion without interference, and to seek, and receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers."
47. A similar enunciation is to be found in the declaration made by the European Convention of Human Rights (1950). Article 10 of that declaration guarantees inter alia, "not only the freedom of the Press to inform the public but also the right of the public to be informed."
48. In keeping with the spirit of the Universal Declaration of 1948, the Preamble of the Constitution of India embodies a solemn resolve of its people to secure, inter alia, to its citizens, liberty of thought and expression. In pursuance of this supreme objective, Article 19(1)(a) guarantees to the citizens, the right to "freedom of speech and expression" as one of the fundamental rights listed in Part III of the Constitution. These rights have been advisedly set out in broad terms leaving scope for their expansion and adaptation, through interpretation, to the changing needs and evolving notions of a free society.
49. In Raj Narain (supra), the Constitution Bench considered a question-whether privilege can be claimed by the Government of Uttar Pradesh under Section 123 of the Evidence Act in respect of what has been described for the sake of brevity to be the Blue Book summoned from the Government of Uttar Pradesh and certain documents summoned from the Superintendent of Police, Rae Bareli, Uttar Pradesh? The Court observed as under:-
"In a government of responsibility like ours, where all the agents of the public must be responsible for their conduct, there can but few secrets. The people of this country have a right to know every public act, everything that is done in a public way, by their public functionaries. They are entitled to know the particulars of every public transaction in all its bearing...."
50. In Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Private Ltd. and Ors. etc. v. Union of India and Ors. : [1986]159ITR856(SC) , this Court dealt with the validity of customs duty on the newsprint in context of Article 19(1)(a). The Court observed (in para 32) thus:
"The purpose of the press is to advance the public interest by publishing facts and opinions without which a democratic electorate cannot make responsible judgments..."
The Court further observed:
"...The public interest in freedom of discussion (of which the freedom of the press is one aspect) stems from the requirement that members of a democratic society should be sufficiently informed that they may influence intelligently the decisions which may affect themselves." (Per Lord Simon of Glaisdale in Attorney-General v. Times Newspapers Ltd. (1973) 3 All ER 54. Freedom of expression, as learned writers have observed, has four broad social purposes to serve: (i) it helps an individual to attain self-fulfilment, (ii) it assists in the discovery of truth, (iii) it strengthens the capacity of an individual in participating in decision-making and (iv) it provides a mechanism by which it would be possible to establish a reasonable balance between stability and social change. All members of society should be able to form their own beliefs and communicate them freely to others. In sum, the fundamental principle involved here is the people's right to know. Freedom of speech and expression should, therefore, receive a generous support from all those who believe in the participation of people in the administration...."
51. In Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India and Ors. v. Cricket Association of Bengal and Ors. MANU/SC/0246/1995 : [1995]1SCR1036 , this Court summarised the law on the freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a) as restricted by Article 19(2) thus:-
"The freedom of speech and expression includes right to acquire information and to disseminate it. Freedom of speech and expression is necessary, for self-fulfilment. It enables people to contribute to debate on social and moral issues. It is the best way to find a truest model of anything, since it is only through it that the widest possible range of ideas can circulate. It is the only vehicle of political discourse so essential to democracy. Equally important is the role it plays in facilitating artistic and scholarly endeavours of all sorts"