MANU/SC/0214/2020
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 1600 of 2020 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 5290 of 2019)
Decided On: 14.02.2020
Appellants: Popatrao Vyankatrao Patil
Vs.
Respondent: The State of Maharashtra and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.A. Bobde, C.J.I., B.R. Gavai and Surya Kant, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, Yogesh S. Kolte, Mahesh P. Shinde and Prashant Papatrao Patil, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: Aaditya A. Pande and Sachin Patil, Advs.
Subject: Commercial
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 226
Cases Referred:
ABL International Ltd. and Anr. v. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/1080/2003; Smt. Gunwant Kaur and Ors. v. Municipal Committee, Bhatinda and Ors. MANU/SC/0397/1969; Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai & Ors. MANU/SC/0664/1998; Urban Improvement Trust, Bikaner v. Mohan Lal MANU/SC/1817/2009; Dilbagh Rai Jarry v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0270/1973; P.P. Abubacker v. The Union of India (UOI) MANU/KE/0029/1972; Madras Port Trust v. Hymanshu International by its Proprietor V. Venkatadri (Dead) by L.R.s MANU/SC/0046/1979; Bhag Singh and Ors. v. Union Territory of Chandigarh through the land acquisition collector, Chandigarh MANU/SC/0265/1985
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 06.08.2018 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 8708 of 2017 (MANU/MH/4029/2018)
Case Category:
MINES, MINERALS AND MINING LEASES
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  2

Mentioned
  6

Case Note:
Commercial - Auction amount - Refund of - Respondent-District Collector had issued notice of public auction for auctioning sand blocks of river - Appellant's bid being highest - Appellant deposited auction amount towards allotment of sand block - However, since said sand block was at distance from school, villagers had opposed excavation of sand - Though Appellant had deposited entire amount, he was not put in possession of said sand block - Appellant made representation for refund of auction amount which stand rejected - Appellant approached High Court by filing Writ Petition - High Court refused to entertain petition on the ground that it involves question of facts - Hence, present appeal - Whether denial on part of Respondents to refund amount to Appellant was reasonable.

Facts:

The Respondent-District Collector had issued a notice of public auction for auctioning the sand blocks of river. The Appellant's bid being the highest, he was awarded the tender. The Appellant deposited amount towards allotment of sand block. However, since the said sand block was at a distance from the school, the villagers had opposed the excavation of sand. As such, though the Appellant had deposited the entire amount, he was not put in possession of the said sand block. In the circumstances, the Appellant made a representation to the Revenue Minister for refund of the auction amount. As the Appellant's representation was sent to the Collector to make enquiry, the Collector, Satara in turn, by letter sought a report from the Tehsildar. The statement of the Appellant came to be recorded by the Circle Officer. He also prepared a Panchnama of the sand block in question which exhibited that possession of sand block was never given to the Appellant and that there was no excavation of sand from the said sand block. The Tehsildar-Respondent No. 4, submitted a detailed report to the Collector pointing out the factual position. The State Government rejected the prayer of the Appellant seeking refund of the auction amount. The Appellant approached the High Court by filing Writ Petition. The High Court refused to entertain the petition on the ground that it involves question of facts.

Held, while allowing the appeal:

(i) The denial on the part of the Respondents to refund the amount to the Appellant could, by no stretch of imagination, be called as reasonable. The action of the Respondents, in denying the refund of the amount of the Appellant, when the Respondents themselves had failed to give possession of the sand block and as a result of which the Appellant could not excavate the sand, would smack of arbitrariness. In this premise, the High Court was not justified in relegating the Appellant to file a suit. [8]

(ii) In view of the undisputed position, that in spite of the Appellant being the highest bidder and in spite of him depositing the entire amount of auction, since the possession of the sand block was not given to him for reasons not attributable to him and he could not excavate the sand, he would be entitled to get refund of the amount deposited by him. [10]

(iii) The impugned order of the High Court was set aside. The Respondents were directed to refund the entire amount received from the Appellant along with interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date on which the Appellant made the first request for refund till the date of realization. [11]

Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
JUDGMENT
1. Leave granted.
2. Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
3. The Appellant has approached this Court being aggrieved by the order dated 6.8.2018, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 8708 of 2017 thereby, declining to entertain the petition since the petition involves question of facts.
4. The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as under:
The Respondent-District Collector, Satara had issued a notice of public auction for auctioning the sand blocks of Krishna river in the year 2012. The Appellant had submitted his bid for excavation of sand insofar as Gat No. 956A, Plot No. 2 at village Rethare Khurd, Taluka Karad. The agreed quantity of excavation was 8500 brass. The Appellant's bid being the highest i.e. Rs. 59,75,000/-, he was awarded the tender.
On 3.1.2012, the Appellant deposited Rs. 15,00,000/- as one-fourth (1/4th) amount of auction with Government treasury. On 16.1.2012, the Appellant deposited remaining auction amount of Rs. 44,83,500/-. The Appellant also deposited Rs. 1,19,500/- towards environmental cost and Rs. 1,23,085/- towards income tax. As such, the total deposit made by the Appellant was Rs. 62,26,085/- towards allotment of sand block.
However, since the said sand block was at a distance of about 100 ft. from the school, the villagers of Rethare Khurd village had opposed the excavation of sand. As such, though the Appellant had deposited the entire amount, he was not put in possession of the said sand block. In the circumstances, the Appellant made a representation to the Revenue Minister, Government of Maharashtra for refund of the auction amount. As the Appellant's representation was sent to the Collector, Satara to make enquiry, the Collector, Satara (Respondent No. 2 herein), in turn, by letter dated 11.6.2012 sought a report from the Tehsildar, Karad.
On 15.6.2012, statement of the Appellant came to be recorded by the Circle Officer, Kale (Respondent No. 5 herein). He also prepared a Panchnama of the sand block in question which exhibited that possession of sand block was never given to the Appellant and that there was no excavation of sand from the said sand block.
The Tehsildar, Karad-Respondent No. 4, submitted a detailed report dated 9.8.2012 to the Collector, Satara pointing out the factual position. The Sub-Divisional Officer, Karad-Respondent No. 3, in turn, submitted a report on 4.9.2012 reiterating the factual position. It appears, that in the transit the file was lost and as such, though the Appellant was not granted possession of the sand block and though yet he had not excavated any sand, the refund of the amount could not be made to him. It appears that there were further correspondences between the authorities and finally, the Desk Officer of the Respondent No. 1 - State Government vide order dated 25.3.2014 rejected the prayer of the Appellant seeking refund of the auction amount.
The Appellant again made several representations. Since there was no response, the Appellant approached the High Court by filing Writ Petition No. 8708 of 2017. As stated earlier, by the impugned order, the High Court refused to entertain the petition on the ground that it involves question of facts.
5. No doubt that, normally, when a petition involves disputed questions of fact and law, the High Court would be slow in entertaining the petition Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. However, it is a Rule of self-restraint and not a hard and fast rule. In any case, this Court in ABL International Ltd. and Anr. v. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/1080/2003 : (2004) 3 SCC 553 has observed thus:
19. Therefore, it is clear from the above enunciation of law that merely because one of the parties to the litigation raises a dispute in regard to the facts of the case, the court entertaining such petition Under Article 226 of the Constitution is not always bound to relegate the parties to a suit. In the above case of Gunwant Kaur [MANU/SC/0397/1969 : (1969) 3 SCC 769] this Court even went to the extent of holding that in a writ petition, if the facts require, even oral evidence can be taken. This clearly shows that in an appropriate case, the writ court has the jurisdiction to entertain a writ petition involving disputed questions of fact and there is no absolute bar for entertaining a writ petition even if the same arises out of a contractual obligation and/or involves some disputed questions of fact.