MANU/SC/0077/2022
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 7724-7725 of 2021
Decided On: 12.01.2022
Appellants: Pragnesh Shah
Vs.
Respondent: Arun Kumar Sharma and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud and A.S. Bopanna, JJ.
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 14; National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 20
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 47, Constitution of India - Article 48A, Constitution of India - Article 51A(g); Environment (protection) Act, 1986 - Section 3(1), Environment (protection) Act, 1986 - Section 3(2); Environment (protection) Rules, 1986 - Rule 5(3); Forest Conservation Act, 1980; National Green Tribunal (practices And Procedure) Rules, 2011 - Rule 24; National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 14, National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 14(1), National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 14(2), National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 15(1), National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 20, National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 22; Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016
Cases Referred:
Mantri Techzone Pvt. Ltd. v. Forward Foundation and Ors. MANU/SC/0315/2019; Sarah Mathew and Ors. v. Institute of Cardio Vascular Diseases by its Director K.M. Cherian and Ors. MANU/SC/1210/2013; New India Assurance Company Ltd. v. Nusli Neville Wadia and Ors. MANU/SC/0166/2008; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0247/2004; Research Foundation for Science Technology and Natural Resources Policy v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0013/2005; Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0686/1996; Hospitality Association of Mudumalai v. In Defence of Environment and Animals and Ors. MANU/SC/0762/2020; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/1123/1997; S. Jagannath v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0188/1997; Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board v. C. Kenchappa and Ors. MANU/SC/8159/2006; Himachal Pradesh Bus Stand Management and Development Authority v. The Central Empowered Committee and Ors. MANU/SC/0015/2021; T.N. Godavarman v. Union of India and Ors. Writ Petition No. 202 of 1995; Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v. Ankita Sinha and Ors.
Case Category:
APPEAL AGAINST ORDERS OF STATUTORY BODIES - TRIBUNALS
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
JUDGMENT
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
This judgment has been divided into the following Sections to facilitate analysis:
A.
The Appeal
B.
Eco-sensitive Zone Notification and Zonal Master Plan 2030
C.
Proceedings before NGT
D.
Submissions of counsel
E.
Jurisdiction of NGT
F.
Merits of Expert Committee Report
G.
Precautionary Principle
H.
Conclusion
A. The Appeal
1. These appeals Under Section 22 of the National Green Tribunal Act1 arise from judgments dated 10 March 2021 and 29 July 2021 of the National Green Tribunal2. By its judgment dated 10 March 2021, the NGT, on the basis of a report3 dated 8 December 2020 submitted by an Expert Committee, allowed an original application4 filed by the first Respondent, which challenged the Zonal Master Plan 20305 prepared by the State of Rajasthan, for the Mount Abu Eco-sensitive Zone6. The report of the Expert Committee had, inter alia, declared land owned by the Appellant to be unfit for construction. Further, by its judgment dated 29 July 2021, the NGT dismissed an application for review7 which had been filed by the Appellant.
B. Eco-sensitive Zone Notification and Zonal Master Plan 2030
2. The Appellant is the owner of a certain parcel of land situated in Mount Abu in the State of Rajasthan. The Appellant claims that the land was earmarked as "Residential" and as a "Tourist Facility" in the Zonal Master Plan 2025 for Mount Abu.
3. On 25 June 2009, the Union Government in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change8 issued a Notification9 by which it notified Mount Abu and the area surrounding it as an ESZ. The ESZ Notification was issued in exercise of powers conferred by Sub-section (1) read with Clause (v) and Clause (xiv) of Section 3(2) of the Environment (Protection) Act 198610 and Rule 5(3) of the Environment Protection Rules 1986. The preamble to the ESZ Notification contains recitals emphasizing the ecological importance of Mount Abu:
S.O. 1545(E) - WHEREAS, Mount Abu area has significant ecological importance comprising of tropical dry deciduous forests at lower altitude and evergreen forests at higher altitude and the flora and fauna of the region comprise of several endemic and rare species; besides Mount Abu has natural heritage such as Nakki Lake and man-made heritage like Dilwara temples and other heritage buildings and structures;
AND WHEREAS, considerable adverse environment impact has been caused due to degradation of the environment with excessive soil erosion and water and air pollution on account of certain developmental activities, thereby endangering not only the natural resources, but also affecting the health and very survival of living beings;
AND WHEREAS, it is necessary to conserve and protect the area from ecological and environmental point of view;
AND WHEREAS, a draft notification Under Sub-section (1) read with Clause (v) and Clause (xiv) of Sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) was published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, vide Notification of Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forests vide number S.O. No. 2497 (E), dated the 22nd October, 2008, as required Under Sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, inviting objections and suggestions from all persons likely to be affected thereby within a period of sixty days from the date on which copies of the Gazette containing the said notification were made available to the public;
AND WHEREAS, copies of the Gazette containing the said notification were made available to the public on the 22nd October, 2008;
AND WHEREAS, all objections and suggestions received in response to the above mentioned draft notification have been duly considered by the Central Government;
Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1) read with Clause (v) and Clause (xiv) of Sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) and Sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, the Central Government hereby notifies Mount Abu and surrounding region enclosed within the boundary described below in the State of Rajasthan as the Mount Abu Eco-sensitive Zone (hereinafter called "the Eco-sensitive Zone").
4. The ESZ Notification was preceded by a draft to which objections and suggestions were invited. The ESZ Notification outlines the boundaries of the ESZ in which activities are to be regulated. The Notification envisages the preparation of a new Zonal Master Plan11 for the restoration of denuded areas, conservation of existing water bodies including Nakki Lake, management of catchment areas, watershed management, groundwater management, soil and moisture conservation, preserving the needs of the local community, conservation of heritage sites (both natural and cultural) and their surroundings, and such other aspects of the ecology and environment which may require attention. Clause 3(1)(i) of the ESZ Notification, in relation to the preparation of the ZMP, is extracted below:
3. The following activities are to be regulated in the Eco-sensitive Zone, namely:
(1) Zonal Master Plan for the Eco-sensitive Zone:
(i) A Zonal Master Plan for the Eco-sensitive Zone shall be prepared by the State Government within a period of two years from the date of publication of this notification and submitted for approval to the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests...
5. The ESZ Notification also envisages a Tourism Master Plan12 to be prepared by the Department of Tourism of the Government for the State of Rajasthan. The TMP would form a component of the ZMP, and is to be based on a detailed Carrying Capacity Study of the ESZ. Further, the Carrying Capacity Study is to be based on the existing infrastructure and not on future projections of any project which requires environmental or forest clearance. While adverting to the natural and man-made heritage in Mount Abu, the ESZ Notification stipulates that:
3. The following activities are to be regulated in the Eco-sensitive Zone, namely:
[...]
(9) Man-made Heritage: Mount Abu is famous for several temples, the most prominent being Dilwara Temples and the main heritage and historical buildings are Achalgarh Fort, Dilwara Jain Temples, Rishav Deo Temple, Neminath Temple, Adinath Temple, Parshwanath Temple, Mahaveer Temple, etc., and later heritage buildings, structures and precincts. The plans for their conservation shall be prepared and incorporated in the Zonal and Sub-Zonal Master Plan and the development or construction activities at or around the heritage sites shall be regulated under the statutory provisions of the Rajasthan Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Antiquities Act and in accordance with the Draft Model Regulations for Conservation of Natural and Manmade Heritage Sites formulated by the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests in 1995.
(10) Water:
(i) All future and existing buildings, where possible, in the Municipal Area shall provide roof-top rain water harvesting structures commensurate with their plinth area and the Institutional and commercial buildings shall not draw water from existing water supply schemes in a manner that adversely affects water supply especially to local villages or settlements.
(ii) In Non-Municipal Areas rain water harvesting shall be undertaken through such structures as percolation tanks and storage tanks and only other means. Ground water aquifer recharge structures shall be constructed wherever such structures do not lead to slope instabilities.
(iii) The rain water collected through storm water drains shall be used to recharge the ground water or to clean the waste disposal drains and sewers.
(iv) The extraction of ground water shall be permitted only for the bona-fide agricultural and domestic consumption of the occupier of the plot and the extraction of ground water for industrial or commercial or residential estates or complexes shall require prior written permission, including of the amount that can be extracted, from the State Ground Water Department. However, the areas rich in ground water may not be diverted for construction activities.
(v) No sale of ground water shall be permitted except with the prior approval of the State Ground Water Department and all steps shall be taken to prevent contamination or pollution of water including from agriculture.
(vi) The area has three big water bodies namely Upper Kodra dam, Lower Kodra dam and Nakki Lake and in addition to this the area has around 25 water places, where water remains throughout the year, which include natural nalla, dams, anicuts, seepage and baoris that are spread over entire area and must be protected.
[...]
(13) Development on and protection of hill slopes:
(i) The Zonal Master Plan shall indicate areas on hill slopes where development shall not be permitted.
(ii) No development shall be undertaken in areas having a steep slope or areas which fall in fault or hazard zones or areas falling on the spring lines and first order streams or slopes with a high degree of erosion as identified by the State Government on the basis of available scientific evidence.
(iii) No development on existing steep hill slopes or slopes with a high degree of erosion shall be permitted.
6. Under Clause 4 of the ESZ Notification, the Central Government has to constitute a Monitoring Committee. In pursuance of the ESZ Notification, a Monitoring Committee was constituted by the Union Government through MoEF&CC on 10 December 2009. The constitution of the Monitoring Committee was revised on 24 January 2012 and 5 May 2015.
7. The Appellant has a grievance that when a draft of ZMP 2030 was published, the status of his land was incorrectly changed from "Residential" and "Tourist Facility" to "Agricultural Zone". The Appellant challenged this before the Chairman of the Monitoring Committee, the MoEF&CC and the State of Rajasthan. Based on it, the status of the Appellant's land was again changed back to "Residential" and "Tourist Facility". Thereafter, ZMP 2030 was notified by the State of Rajasthan on 29 October 2015, following the approval of the MoEF&CC on 28 September 2015.
C. Proceedings before NGT
8. The ZMP 2030 was challenged by the first Respondent by his original application on the ground that it is not in conformity with ESZ Notification, since it fails to discourage construction activities at or near the heritage sites, conserve the existing water bodies and permits change of land use by illegal structures. Since the first Respondent's original application mentioned the Appellant's land, the Appellant was allowed to intervene in the proceedings by the NGT in its order dated 10 April 2017.
9. On 26 November 2018, the NGT issued an order which noted that the first Respondent's original application contended, inter alia, that ZMP 2030 had permitted illegal change of land use, in direct contradiction to the ESZ Notification, in thirteen locations, which included the Appellant's land. To assess the claims made in the first Respondent's original application, the NGT constituted an Expert Committee consisting of two representatives of MoEF&CC, a representative of the School of Planning and Architecture, Delhi (since it had been engaged by the State of Rajasthan as a consultant), and a representative of Central Pollution Control Board13. The mandate of the Expert Committee was as follows:
21. The Committee will undertake comparison of ZMP 2030, in terms of letter of MoEF&CC dated 28.09.2015 and ESZ Notification dated 25.06.2009 and point out the aberrations in some besides comparing ZMP 2030 map with reference to pre-existing 2010 map in the light of ESZ notification. Thirteen (13) locations noted above must also be specifically looked into. The Expert Committee may also look into the suggestions relating to prohibiting use of plastics, burning of garbage/or any other waste, proper laying of high tension lines for protecting animals and birds life particularly in Salim Ali Bird Sanctuary area, preventing forest fire, conservation of Nakki lake and water quality management, sitting and operation of Solid Waste processing plant in accordance with Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 (with reference to sanctuary area), any other issues relating to environment management which may become a part of ZMP 2030, including observations of this Tribunal in Kasuali case.
22. The Committee will also look into the points of concern raised by the applicant in reference to conversion of green areas to non-green areas, permissibility of construction on higher degree slopes, conservation of rocks, water bodies and wildlife and other heritage sites, the issue of water scarcity, carrying-capacity of Mount Abu with regard to number of tourists and vehicles to be permitted having regard to the availability of the infrastructure without relying upon future projection, as required in terms of ESZ notification.
10. The Expert Committee submitted a report on 4 September 2019, which was not found to be acceptable when it was considered by the NGT on 7 November 2019. As a consequence, the NGT modified the composition of the Expert Committee, with the following observations:
8. Though the Committee was to furnish its report within three months from the order dated 6.11.2018 report has been filed almost after more than 9 months on 04.09.2019. We find from the report that the Committee has assumed the ZMP to be conclusive on the ground that suitability analysis test had already been carried out by the State Government. This approach is inconsistent with the directions of this Tribunal. If the analysis of the State Government was to be treated as final, there was no need for the Committee.
11. The reconstituted Committee then submitted the Expert Committee Report. The Expert Committee enquired into the change in land use through high resolution satellite images, while analysing the data with particular reference to ten identified sites, including the Appellant's land. The NGT then heard submissions on the Expert Committee Report. By its impugned judgment dated 29 July 2021, the NGT observed that the Expert Committee Report was based on authentic data and on field visits by the Committee and is supported by adequate reasons. The NGT noted that the object of notifying certain areas as ESZs is to protect certain specified sensitive areas by restricting and regulating development activities. Such areas may be based on species, geomorphologic features or on the eco-system. The NGT held that it was necessary to protect bio-diversity zones by creating regulated buffers around them to protect their flora and fauna, prevent habitat destruction and protect fragile ecology. Adverting to the backdrop of the ESZ Notification, the NGT noted that the Supreme Court had in T.N. Godavarman v. Union of India and Ors.14 ("T.N. Godavarman") appointed Expert Committees to identify ESZs across India, and when such ESZs were eventually identified, Mount Abu was cleared as an ESZ as well. The NGT further observed that the object of notifying ESZs is to protect a specified area from the irreversible degradation of its environment with a view to give effect to the principles of sustainable development, inter-generational equity and the public trust doctrine in exercise of powers conferred by Section 3(2)(v) of the EP Act.
12. The NGT then proceeded to deal with individual sites under consideration. The subject matter of the present appeals pertains to an entry in Table 16 of the Expert Committee Report. Table 16 is titled as follows:
Suitability of 10 identified sites within Mount Abu ESZ as reviewed by the expert committee based on the site visit/ground verification as well as interactions with the local residents/Mount Abu Municipality officials/Town Planning Department officials/other stakeholders during 16-17 January 2020
The evaluation of the site in question, i.e., the Appellant's land, is tabulated in Table 16 as follows:
13. The NGT noted that the above site ("near STP Plant") has not been found suitable for construction on considerations based on the wild life eco-system. The NGT also accepted the view of the Expert Committee that the conversion of green areas into non-green areas should not be allowed, except in exceptional situations mentioned in the Report, and that the STP must be duly maintained. The NGT, while accepting the Expert Committee Report, thus directed that the ZMP 2030 should be brought in conformity within three months.
14. The findings of the NGT in relation to Appellant's land were challenged by the Appellant in a review application, which was rejected on 29 July 2021. This has led to the present appeals.
D. Submissions of counsel
15. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant has urged two submissions:
(i) Firstly, the NGT, being an adjudicatory body constituted by the NGT Act, is vested with limited jurisdiction Under Section 14 to deal with a substantial question of environment arising out of the statutes enumerated in Schedule I to the NGT Act. The NGT had acted beyond its jurisdiction in directing the amendment of the ZMP 2030; and
(ii) Secondly, on merits:
a. The Expert Committee had prepared a draft report in July 202015, which was not placed before the NGT and was obtained by the Appellant through a Right to Information request on 1 February 2021. In the Draft Report, Table 23 pertains to the suitability of ten identified sites within the Mount Abu ESZ and it contained a column containing remarks on the biodiversity at each of these locations. In this backdrop, it was submitted that the Appellant's land was shown to be encompassed by the movement of wild life, more specifically, the sloth bear and panther. In this context, it was urged that a similar situation existed in Table 23 with respect to another site (described as "Sunrise Housing Society"). However, in the Expert Committee Report, the column on bio-diversity is missing, which hides crucial information on the basis of which the final recommendations were made. The Appellant alleges that the column on bio-diversity is missing because the Expert Committee Report was manipulated to favor others over the Appellant; and
b. Whereas other similar sites have been granted clearances in the Expert Committee Report, the Appellant has not been cleared. In other words, the submission is that the Report has proceeded on the basis of a "pick and choose" process.
16. Opposing these submissions, Mr. Amit Sibal, Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents urged the following submissions:
(i) The ESZ Notification, which has been issued in pursuance of the intervention of this Court in T.N. Godavarman (supra), recognizes the ecological importance of Mount Abu, which is comprised of tropical dry deciduous forests at a lower altitude and evergreen forests at higher altitudes;
(ii) The ZMP 2030 was issued in accordance with the ESZ Notification;
(iii) The Expert Committee included domain experts, town planners and government officials who proceeded to identify the issues with the specified sites in Table 16 after careful analysis and site visits;
(iv) The Expert Committee Report is founded on the precautionary principle and as it is based on a scientific approach, it must warrant deference;
(v) Schedule I to the NGT Act, inter alia, refers to the Forest Conservation Act 198016 and the EP Act;
(vi) The ESZ notification has been issued in exercise of powers conferred by the EP Act;
(vii) The order of the NGT dated 7 November 2019 did not accept the report of the initial Expert Committee, and reconstituted it. This order has attained finality since it was not challenged by the Appellants;
(viii) The Appellant is relying upon the Draft Report, which was not in the public domain since it was an incomplete report. Moreover, the Draft Report contains endorsements as against the site in question to the effect that it was not suitable. Further, there is a valid distinction between the site in question and Ors. (such as the "Sunset Road Scheme" and "Sunrise Housing Society") where construction has been allowed. In the case of the "Sunset Road Scheme", the land use was for residential purposes while on the contrary, the Appellant has admitted to converting the site in question for tourism and residential buildings under the ZMP 2030; and
(ix) While on the one hand, the Expert Committee which comprises, inter alia, of environmental experts had considered each of the sites in Table 16 of the Expert Committee Report, the Appellant has brought on record no evidence to establish any error or perversity in the Report which was accepted by the NGT.
E. Jurisdiction of NGT
17. Sub-section (1) of Section 1417 of the NGT Act provides that the NGT shall have the jurisdiction over all civil cases where a substantial question relating to the environment, including the enforcement of any legal right relating to the environment is involved and such question arises out of the implementation of the enactments specified in Schedule I to the NGT Act. Under Sub-section (2) of Section 14, the NGT is empowered to hear disputes set out in Sub-section (1), and pass orders thereon. Section 15(1) further provides for the reliefs which may be granted by the NGT, and reads as follows:
15. Relief, compensation and restitution--(1) The Tribunal may, by an order, provide --
(a) relief and compensation to the victims of pollution and other environmental damage arising under the enactments specified in the Schedule I (including accident occurring while handling any hazardous substance);
(b) for restitution of property damaged;
(c) for restitution of the environment for such area or areas, as the Tribunal may think fit.
18. Among the statutes which are delineated in Schedule I are the FC Act (Entry 3) and the EP Act (Entry 5). There can be no manner of doubt that the original application filed by the first Respondent before the NGT in the present case implicated a substantial question relating to the environment. The 'substantial question' arose from the provisions contained in the ESZ Notification in relation to the ESZ in Mount Abu. The ESZ Notification traces its origin to the EP Act, under which the Union Government through MoEF&CC is empowered to issue it. In the exercise of its jurisdiction, the NGT is empowered Under Section 15(1)(c) to provide for the restoration of the environment in such area or areas. The ESZ Notification in Clause 3(1) provides for the ZMP for the ESZ in this context. Assessing the conformity of the ZMP 2030 with the terms of the ESZ Notification is clearly within the remit of the NGT.
19. In Mantri Techzone (P) Ltd. v. Forward Foundation MANU/SC/0315/2019 : (2019) 18 SCC 494, a three-Judge Bench of this Court noted that Section 15(1)(c) of the NGT Act affords broad powers to the NGT. Speaking for the Court, Justice S. Abdul Nazeer held:
43. Section 15(1)(c) of the Act is an entire island of power and jurisdiction read with Section 20 of the Act. The principles of sustainable development, precautionary principle and polluter pays, propounded by this Court by way of multiple judicial pronouncements, have now been embedded as a bedrock of environmental jurisprudence under the NGT Act. Therefore, wherever the environment and ecology are being compromised and jeopardized, the Tribunal can apply Section 20 for taking restorative measures in the interest of the environment.