MANU/SC/0522/2003
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 7133, 7134, 7135, 7136 and 7138 of 1999
Decided On: 30.07.2003
Appellants:Pratibha Nema and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:State of M.P. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
K.G. Balakrishnan and P. Venkatarama Reddi, JJ.
Counsels:
S.S. Ray and N.N. Goswami, Sr. Advs., S.K. Jain, Pradeep Aggarwal, Arjun Ranganathan, Kumar Kartikey, Anil Vyas, Anjali Doshi, Ruchi Kohli, L.P. Singh, A.P. Dhamija, Baldev Krishan Satija and Pratibha Jain, Advs., Vivek K. Tankha, Adv. General of M.P., Ashok Kumar Gupta, Farrukh Rasheed, Mukesh Kumar, Rajesh Pancholi, R.C. Verma, Mukesh Verma, Manish Shanker, R.N. Poddar, Shreekant N. Terdal, B.V. Balaram Das, P.C. Sen and S.K. Agnihotri, Advs. for the appearing parties
Subject: Property
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Companies Act, 1956 - Section 3; Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 226; Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 17(1), Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 3, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 4, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 4(1), Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 4(2), Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 40, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 41, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 5-A, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 5A, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 5A(2), Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 6, Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 6(1), Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 6(3), Land Acquisition Act, 1894 [repealed] - Section 9(2)
Cases Referred:
Hamabai Framjee Petit v. Secretary of State for India, MANU/PR/0073/1914; Smt. Somawanti and Ors. v. State of Punjab, MANU/SC/0034/1962; Jage Ram v. State of Haryana, MANU/SC/0571/1971; Manubhai Jehtalal Patel v. State of Gujarat, MANU/SC/0292/1983; Malimabu case, MANU/SC/0306/1978; Indrajit C. Parekh v. State of Gujarat, MANU/SC/0403/1975; State of Punjab v. Gurdial Singh, MANU/SC/0433/1979; Raja Anand Brahma Shah v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0214/1966; Bajirao T. Kote v. State of Maharashtra, MANU/SC/0614/1995; R.L. Arora v. State of Uttar Pradesh, MANU/SC/0033/1964; Srinivasa Co-operative House Building Society Limited v. Madam G. Sastry MANU/SC/0754/1994; Pandit Jhandu Lal v. State of Punjab, MANU/SC/0265/1960; Madhya Pradesh Housing Board v. Md. Shafi, MANU/SC/0484/1992; Munshi Singh v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0517/1972; Aflatoon v. Governor of Delhi, MANU/SC/0437/1974
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.7.99 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in W.P. No. 403 of 1997
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  1

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  2

Relied On
  8

Case Note:
(1) Land Acquisition Act, 1894 - Sections 4 (1), 5A and 6--Acquisition of land--Acquisition for purpose of setting up of 'diamond park' by companies--Whether for public purpose?--Held, "yes"--Setting up industry in private sector would ultimately benefit people.

A public purpose is involved in the acquisition of land for setting up an industry in private sector as it would ultimately benefit the people. However, any and every industry need not necessarily promote public purpose and there could be exceptions which negate the public purpose. But, it must be borne in mind that the satisfaction of the Government as to the existence of public purpose cannot be lightly faulted and it must remain uppermost in the mind of the Court.

Jage Ram v. State of Haryana , (1971) 1 SCC 671 and R. L. Arora v. State of U. P., AIR 1964 SC 1230, followed.

(2) Land Acquisition Act, 1894--Sections 4 (1), 5A and 6--Second proviso to Section 6 (1)--Acquisition for setting up industry in private sector--Is of public purpose if Government comes forward to sanction payment of nominal sum towards compensation--M. P. Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Nigam) being owned and controlled by State itself proceeded to make payment of substantial amount towards compensation -- Hence, requirement of second proviso to Section 6 (1) satisfied--And acquisition cannot be faulted with.

In terms of second proviso to Section 6 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, a provision for payment of compensation, wholly or partly, out of public revenues or some fund controlled or managed by a local authority is sine qua non for making a declaration to the effect that a particular land is needed for a public purpose. Even if the public purpose is behind the acquisition for a company, it shall not be deemed to be an acquisition for a public purpose unless at least part of the compensation is payable out of public revenues which includes the fund of a local authority or the funds of a Corporation owned or controlled by the State.

However, what is considered to be an acquisition for facilitating the setting up of an industry in private sector could get imbued with the character of public purpose acquisition if only the Government comes forward to sanction the payment of a nominal sum towards compensation.

R. L. Arora v. State of U. P., AIR 1962 SC 764 (CB), applied.

The M. P. Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Nigam) which is undisputedly owned and controlled by the State has itself proceeded to make payment of substantial amount towards compensation even at the initial stages in anticipation of the interim award that was made on 7.6.1996. Payment of Rs. 1.5 crores was made by respondent No. 6 (Nigam) through the General Manager, District Industries Centre by means of a cheque dated 26.2.1996. This gives an unequivocal pointer that the State owned corporation, namely, the Nigam, had to bear the cost of acquisition and as a first step, it made the payment of Rs. 1.5 crores. The assurance on the part of the State Government to sanction the funds, would indicate that in case of deficit, the Government is prepared to make the necessary financial provision to enable the Nigam to meet the cost of acquisition.

Once the amount paid towards advance lease premium by the company may be on a rough and ready basis, is credited to the account of the Nigam, obviously, it becomes the fund of the Nigam. Such fund, when utilized for the purpose of payment of compensation, wholly or in part, satisfies the requirements of the second proviso to Section 6 (1) read with Explanation 2. The genesis of the fund is not the determinative factor, but its ownership in praesenti that matters.

(3) Land Acquisition Act, 1894--Sections 4 (1), 5A and 6--Acquisition of land for setting up of 'diamond park'--Whether vitiated by colourable exercise of power simply because it was carried out with utmost speed?--Held, "no".

The acquisition was thought of with the earnest objective to achieve industrial growth of the State in public interest. It is fairly clear that the State's goal to bring into existence a huge industrial complex housing a good number of diamond cutting and polishing units has led to the present acquisition. Such industrial complex is compendiously termed as 'diamond park'. The State Government and its agencies including the Nigam acted within the framework of the 'Industrial Policy and Action Plan, 1994' in taking the decision to develop diamond park complex. One cannot view the planning process in the abstract and there should be a realistic approach. Industrial projects and industrial development are possible only when there is initiative, coordination and participation on the part of both the private entrepreneurs as well as the Governmental agencies. The active role and initiative shown by A.K.I. Ltd., cannot give a different colour to the acquisition which otherwise promotes public purpose.

The speed at which the proposal was pursued should be appreciated rather than condemning it, though the over-zealousness on the part of authorities concerned to short-circuit the procedure has turned out to be counterproductive. True, the tardy progress of acquisition would have sent wrong signals to the prospective investors, as contended by the learned advocate-general. However, due attention should have been given to the legal formalities such as holding of enquiry, specification of public purpose in clear terms and giving sufficient indication of State meeting the cost of acquisition wholly or in part. At the same time, the Court cannot read mala fides in between the lines ; in fact, no personal malice or ulterior motives have been attributed to the Chief Minister or to any other official. The material on record does not lead to the necessary or even reasonable conclusion that the Government machinery identified itself with the private interests of the company, forsaking public interest. Public purpose does not cease to be so merely because the acquisition facilitates the setting up of industry by a private enterprise and benefits it to that extent. Nor the existence or otherwise of public purpose be judged by the lead and initiative taken by the entrepreneurs desirous of setting up the industry and the measure of coordination between them and various State agencies. The fact that despite the unwillingness expressed by A.K.I. Ltd., to go ahead with the project, the Government is still interested in acquisition is yet another pointer that the acquisition was motivated by public purpose.

(4) Land Acquisition Act, 1894--Sections 4 (1), 5A and 6--Notification under Section 4 (1) and declaration under Section 6--Not liable to be struck down on ground of vagueness of public purpose--Alleged vagueness not of such degree as to defy sense and understanding--Appellant not suffering any prejudice.

Though the State Government could have discreetly avoided to use sophisticated industrial jargon, it is not that the specified public purpose is so vague and indefinite that the public will not be in a position to understand its nature and purpose. That such terminology has gained currency is evident from the fact that the same expression was used in the Industrial Policy document. It may not be out of place to mention that in the recent times, the terminology such as Industrial Park, Information Technology Park is widely in circulation. Moreover, against the column 'authorised officer under Section 4 (2)' (close to the column 'public purpose'), the designation of Manager, District Industries Centre, Indore is specified. This is a pointer to the fact that the land was being acquired for industrial purpose. Therefore, the alleged vagueness is not of such a degree as to defy sense and understanding.

On the facts of the case, it is not possible to draw the conclusion that the appellants have suffered any prejudice or handicap on account of the alleged vagueness in the description of public purpose.

When no prejudice has been demonstrated nor could be reasonably inferred, it would be unjust and inappropriate to strike down the notification under Section 4 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, on the basis of a nebulous plea, in exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226.

(5) Land Acquisition Act, 1894--Sections 4 (1), 5A and 6--Acquisition of land for setting up 'diamond park'--Whether to damage ecological balance and national security?--Held, "no".

The diamond cutting and polishing equipment and the operations connected therewith does not give rise to any pollution caused by emission of fumes, noise or discharge of effluents. The problem of air, water or soil pollution excepting to a minimal extent, caused on account of inhabitation and transportation, will not arise. The Army Headquarters expressed no objection from military security point of view for setting up the diamond park. So also, the Centre for the Advanced Technology in its letter addressed to the managing director of the Nigam made it clear that the establishment of diamond park would not cause any security problems to the said Centre. On the basis of the materials placed before the Court, it is not possible to hold that the proposed diamond park project will be detrimental to public health, safety or security so as to override the public interest that is served by setting up export-oriented industries.

(6) Land Acquisition Act, 1894--Sections 4 (1), 5A and 6--Acquisition of excess land--Notification cannot be faulted on this ground--However, Government should make fresh assessment -- Acquisition upheld--Appeals dismissed.

It is primarily within the domain of State Government to decide how much extent of land has to be acquired keeping in view the present and future needs. Though, no fault is to be found with the notification on this ground, yet it is desirable that the State Government makes a fresh assessment in the light of the latest situation and exclude any part of the land which may be found to be in excess.
JUDGMENT
P. Venkatarama Reddi, J.
1. The acquisition of 73.3 hectares of dry land situate in Rangwasa village of Indore District and Tehsil belonging to the appellants and others is the subject-matter of challenge in these appeals filed by the landholders. The said extent of land was notified for acquisition under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act (hereinafter referred to as 'Act') for the alleged public purpose of 'establishment of diamond park'. This parcel of land together with an extent of 44.8 hectares of Government land was meant to be placed at the disposal of the industries Department and/or Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as 'the Nigam') for the purpose of allotting the same to various industrial units--the foremost among them being the 9th respondent-Company, for setting up diamond cutting and polishing units with modern technology. The proposal in this regard emanated from the General Manager of District Industries center, on the initiative taken by the 9th Respondent. After the land was located by a joint inspection committee of officials, the Government of Madhya Pradesh (Commerce & Industries Department) had given sanction 'in principle' for the acquisition. The District Collector, Indore through his letter dated 24.1.1996 sought the approval of the Commissioner, Indore Division to invoke Section 17(1) of the Act in order to expedite the process of acquisition. In that letter, the Collector mentioned that prestigious exporters from India as well as foreign countries were likely to establish their units in the park which would generate good deal of foreign exchange and create employment potential.
2. The Commissioner accorded his approval by a communication dated 29.1.1996. This resulted in the issuance of the notification under Section 4(1) of the Act on 30th June, 1996 by the Collector & Ex-officio Deputy Secretary to Government, to whom it appears the powers were delegated. By the same Notification, the enquiry under Section 5A was dispensed with. It was indicated in the Notification that the land map could be inspected in the office of the SDO, Indore and General Manager, District Industries center. A few days later i.e., on 9.2.1996, the declaration under Section 6 of the Act was published. The Collector (Land Acquisition) was directed to take possession after the expiry of 15 days from the date of issuance of notice under Section 9(2) of the Act. Before the possession was taken, the writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution were filed and an order of status quo was granted. The writ petitions and the Letters Patent Appeals were dismissed. In the meanwhile, it appears that an interim award was made for a sum of Rs. 2,14,91,115 representing 80% of the estimated compensation amount. The SLPs filed in this Court were disposed of on 11.10.1996 on the basis of the representation made by the learned counsel for the State of Madhya Pradesh that the Notification under Section 6 will be withdrawn and the procedure under Section 5A will be followed. Accordingly, the Collector, Indore District published a Notification on 15.10.1996 withdrawing the declaration under Section 6. After due enquiry, the Land Acquisition Officer Submitted a report under Section 5A overruling the objections put forward by the appellants. On a perusal of the report, the Collector as well the Commissioner decided to go ahead with the acquisition. Accordingly, a fresh Notification under Section 6 was issued on 3.1.1997. As in the earlier Notification, the public purpose was mentioned as 'establishment of a diamond park'. This was again challenged by the aggrieved landholders including the appellants. A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the writ petitions which were filed by the present appellants having interest in about 63 acres in Survey No. 684, Against that judgment, these appeals by special leave have come up. This Court, while taking note of certain additional facts disclosed in I.A. No. 2/2001, passed an order on 29.8.2001 formulating four questions in respect of which the findings of the High Court were called for. The following are the four questions:
1) Whether B. Arun Kumar International Ltd. deposited a sum of Rs. 3 crores for payment of compensation to the land holders for acquisition of land for them.
2) Whether in view of the facts stated in I.A. No. 2/2001 and the counter affidavit and further affidavits the acquisition of land was for the Company and not for public purpose.
3) If the findings on question No. 1 & 2 are in the affirmative, whether any subsequent withdrawal of compensation amount by Arun Kumar International Ltd. would not affect the invalidity of notification issued under Section 4 of the Act.
4) If the findings on issues Nos. 1 & 2 are in the affirmative, whether the State Government also contributed partly towards compensation to be paid to the land holders and in its absence the acquisition of land for public purpose is invalid.
The questions were framed in the light of the appellants' contention that the acquisition was not for a public purpose and it was only meant to benefit the 9th Respondent-Company and its associates which contributed its own funds for facilitating the acquisition.
3. The matters were directed to be listed on receipt of the findings of the High Court with a further direction not to treat the cases as part-heard.
4. The High Court has, by its order dated 5-7-2002 recorded its findings on the four points and transmitted the same to this Court. All the findings are against the appellants and naturally, therefore, they are being challenged.
5. Broadly, four contentions have been urged before us. They are: 1. Acquisition is not for a public purpose. The entire acquisition is a subterfuge to hand over the acquired land to the Company in the guise of acquisition for a public purpose. Even the amount paid towards compensation was not out of public revenues, but out of the money provided by the Company for the specific purpose of compensation. 2. The public purpose stated in the Notifications under Sections 4 & 6 is vague. 3. The area of the land proposed to be acquired is far in excess of reasonable requirements and 4. Environmental considerations were not kept in view while taking a decision to acquire the land for industrial purpose.
Analysis of relevant provisions and the settled legal position:
6. In order to appreciate the contentions set out above in proper perspective, it would be appropriate to advert to certain basic provisions of the Act and recapitulate the well settled principles relating to public purpose and acquisition of land under Part II and Part VII of the Act. Section 4(1) which occurs in Part II of the Act contemplates a notification to be published in the official gazette etc., whenever it appears to the appropriate Government that land in any locality is needed for any public purpose or for a company. Thereupon, various steps enumerated in sub-Section (2) could be undertaken by the authorized officer. The is an inclusive definition of 'public purpose' in clause (f) of Section 3. The clause was inserted by Central Act 68 of 1984. Many instances of public purpose specified therein would have perhaps been embraced within the fold of public purpose as generally understood. May be, by way of abundant caution or to give quietus to legal controversies, the inclusive definition has been added. One thing which deserves particular notice is the rider at the end of clause (f) by which the acquisition of land for Companies is excluded from the purview of the expression 'public purpose'. However, notwithstanding his dichotomy. speaking from the point of view of public purpose, the provisions of Part II and Part VII are not mutually exclusive as elaborated later.
7. The concept of public purpose (sans inclusive definition) was succinctly set out by Batchelor, J. in a vintage decision of Bombay High Court. In Hamabai Framjee Petit v. Secretary of State for India MANU/PR/0073/1914, the Privy Council quoted with approval the following passage from the judgment of Batchelor J:
"General definitions are, I think, rather to be avoided where the avoidance is possible, and I make no attempt to define precisely the extent of the phrase 'public purpose' in the lease; it is enough to say that in my opinion, the phrase, whatever else it may mean, must include a purpose, that is, an object or aim in which the general interest of the community, as opposed to the particular interest of individuals, is directly and vitally concerned."