MANU/SC/1471/2011
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 6962, 6963 of 2005, 10535 of 2011 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 24029/2005), Civil Appeal No. 10536 of 2011 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 9150/2007)
Decided On: 05.12.2011
Appellants: R.K. Mittal and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Swatanter Kumar and Ranjana Prakash Desai, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Himanshu Munshi, Jitendra Mohan Sharma, Sandeep Singh, Vibhor, Ajit Sharma, Vivek Sharma and Neeraj Kumar Sharma, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: Ravinder Kumar, Shrish Kumar Mishra, Sheil Sethi, Rachana Joshi Issar, Nidhi Tiwari, Ambreen Rasool, Alok Prakash, Vinay Kumar Garg, Himanshu Munshi, Pahlad Singh Sharma, Navin Chawla, Advs., Manoj Swarup and Co., C. Mukund, Bijoy Kumar Jain, A. Jain and Pankaj Jain, Advs.
Subject: Property
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Maharashtra Regional And Town Planning Act, 1966 - Section 31, Maharashtra Regional And Town Planning Act, 1966 - Section 37; Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section (1), Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 12, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 14, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 14A, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 15, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 18, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 19, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 19(4), Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 2(b), Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 2(d), Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 3, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 6, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 6(2), Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 6(2)(b), Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 6(2)(h), Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 7, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 8, Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 - Section 8(2); Uttar Pradesh Urban Planning And Development Act 1973 - Section 41
Cases Referred:
Munshi Ram v. Union of India MANU/SC/0498/2000 : (2000) 7 SCC 22; Hari Rao v. N. Govindachari and Ors. MANU/SC/0565/2005 : (2005) 7 SCC 643; Dev Brat Sharma v. Jagjit Mehta (1990) Supp. SCC 724; NOIDA Entrepreneurs Association v. NOIDA and Ors. (2011) 6 SCC 527; NDMC and Ors. v. Tanvi Trading and Credit Private Limited and Ors. MANU/SC/3683/2008 : (2008) 8 SCC 765; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0488/2004 : (2004) 6 SCC 588; Bangalore Medical Trust v. B.S. Mudappa and Ors. MANU/SC/0426/1991 : (1991) 4 SCC 54; S.N. Chandrashekar and Anr. v. State of Karnataka and Ors. MANU/SC/8005/2006 : (2006) 3 SCC 208; ITC Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0745/2011 : (2011) 7 SCC 493; Dr. G.N. Khajuria and Ors. v. Delhi Development Authority and Ors. (1995) 5 SCC 762; Shabi Construction Company v. City & Industrial Development Corporation and Anr. MANU/SC/0724/1995 : (1995) 4 SCC 301; K.K. Bhalla v. State of M.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0234/2006 : (2006) 3 SCC 581; Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, New Okhla Industrial Development Authority and Anr. v. Mange Ram Sharma and Anr. SLP (C) No. 24029/2005; K. Ramadas Shenoy v. Chief Officer, Town Municipal Council, Udipi and Ors. MANU/SC/0216/1975 : (1976) 1 SCC 24; M.I. Builders v. Radhey Shyam Sahu MANU/SC/0999/1999 : (1999) 6 SCC 464; Virender Gaur and Ors. v. State of Haryana and Ors. MANU/SC/0629/1995 : (1995) 2 SCC 577; Delhi Pradesh Citizen Council v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/8435/2006 : (2006) 6 SCC 305
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 09.01.2002 of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 36709 of 2001 (MANU/UP/0022/2002)
Disposition:
Disposed of
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  12

Distinguished
  2

Mentioned
  3


Case Note:
Civil - Discretionary power of development authority - Sections 6(2), 14 of U.P. Industrial Area Development Act, 1976, Regulations 3 and 4 of New Okhla Industrial Development Area (Preparation and Finalization of Plan Regulations, 1991 - Whether the action of the Development Authority in permitting mixed user was in apparent violation of the statutory provisions in the Master Plan?

Held, the development Plan has to be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Regulations framed thereunder. The notified development Plan has a legal sanction and provisions contained therein are mandatory in nature. They are incapable of being altered or varied without following the due process prescribed in law. The public interest, as codified in the statutory regulations and the provisions of the Act, should control the conduct of the Development Authority and its decision making process, rather than popular public demand guiding the exercise of its discretion, that too, in a somewhat arbitrary manner. The Development Authority or its officers, have no power to vary the user and spaces prescribed in the Master Plan, except by amending the relevant laws and that too, for a proper object and purpose. Any decision, as a policy matter or otherwise, for any extent of public convenience, shall be vitiated, if it is not supported by the authority. The action of the Development Authority in permitting mixed user was in apparent violation of the statutory provisions in the Master Plan. Establishment of banks and nursing homes in the residential sectors meant for residential use alone was unequivocal violation of the statutory provisions in the Master Plan. No final decision was taken by the Development Authority in consonance with the provisions of the Act to permit such user in the residential sector. All the cases where banks, nursing homes or any commercial activity was being carried on offices in the residential sectors would amount to change of user and thus be impermissible. No such jurisdiction or authority vests in the officers of the Development Authority to permit change of user in its discretion and in violation of the law in force. Appeals disposed of.
Ratio Decidendi:
"Banking or nursing homes or any other commercial activity is not permitted in any sector, in the Development Area earmarked for residential use."
JUDGMENT
Swatanter Kumar, J.
1. Leave granted in both the Special Leave Petitions.
2. The ambit and scope of power of New Okhla Industrial Development Authority (for short, the 'Development Authority') to permit users, other than residential, in the sectors specifically earmarked for 'residential use' in the Master Plan of the New Okhla Industrial Development Area (for short, the 'Development Area') is the basic question that falls for consideration of this Court in this bunch of appeals. These appeals demonstrate some of the instances of widespread violation of statutory provisions and somewhat arbitrary exercise of power by the Development Authority. Lack of adoption of uniform application of law has resulted in large number of cases of violation of law all over the State of Uttar Pradesh going unnoticed. The time has come for the Development Authorities to change their style of functioning and act vigilantly and uniformly, that too, strictly in accordance with law, keeping in view the larger public interest.
Introductory Facts
3. This judgment shall dispose of the above referred four civil appeals and the applications for intervention therein. Out of the four appeals, in Civil Appeal No. 6962 of 2005 and Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 24029 of 2005, the lease deed in favour of the parties had been cancelled by the Development Authority while in other two appeals, Civil Appeal No. 6963 of 2005 and Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 9150 of 2007, after giving notice, it had passed an order requiring the parties concerned to stop the misuse within the stipulated time, failing which appropriate action in accordance with law, including cancellation of the lease deed, would be taken. The facts and circumstances in all the appeals and even the intervention applications are somewhat similar. In any case, the common question of law arising in all the appeals and applications is whether the residential premises can be, wholly or partly, used by the original allottee or even its transferee, for any purpose other than residential? We do not consider it necessary to refer to the facts of each case in greater detail, except the facts of the lead case, i.e., Civil Appeal No. 6962 of 2005, R.K. Mittal v. State of U.P. However, wherever reference to certain additional facts is called for, we would notice the same in the other cases as well.
4. The Development Authority executed a lease deed dated 2nd April, 1988 in favour of Shri Rajendra Kumar Srivastava in relation to Plot No. 778, Block A, Sector XIV, New Okhla Industrial Development Area, District Ghaziabad, admeasuring about 274.37 square meters as per the boundaries described in the deed. Upon the plot, the lessee raised some construction which remained unfinished. The lessee thereupon actually transferred the plot in question along with unfinished superstructure vide Transfer Deed dated 20th August, 1999 in favour Shri R.K. Mittal, Shri Ashok Garg and Shri Sanjeev Gupta, the Appellants herein. The original lease deed contained specific stipulations in regard to the lessee being obliged to obey all the Rules, Regulations and Directions made by the lessor. The lessee was to raise construction as per approved plans and to use the premises only for the purpose for which it was committed in terms of the lease and as per law. These clauses of the lease deed read as under:
(d) That the lessee will obey and submit to all Directions issued or Regulations made by the Lessor now existing or hereafter to exist so for as the same are incidental to the possession of immovable property or so far as they effect the health, safety or convenience of the other inhabitants of the place.
(e) That the Lessee will at his own cost erect on the demised premises in accordance with the plans, elevation and design and in a position to be approved by the lessor or any officer authorised by the lessor in that behalf in writing and in a substantial and workman like manner, a residential building only with all necessary, sewers, drains and other appurtenances according to the Directions issued or Regulations made in respect of buildings, drains, latrines and connection with sewer.
xxx
(h) That the lessee shall use the demised premises only for the purpose of constructing a building for residential purpose of customary home occupation or residential cum medical and surgical clinic or dispensary or professional office and for no other purpose without the consent of the Lessor and subject to such terms & conditions as Lessor may impose and will not do or suffer to be done on demised premises or any part thereof, any act or thing which may be or grow to be a nuisance, damage, annoyance, or inconvenience to the Lessor or the owners, occupiers of other premises in the neighbourhood.
5. The Transfer Deed executed by the original lessee in favour of the Appellants also contained similar conditions and in addition thereto provided that the conditions of the lease deed shall be binding upon the Appellants. The relevant clauses of the Transfer Deed read as under:
10. That the Transferees shall complete the construction of plot and shall obtain Occupancy Certificate of Plot from Building Cell, Noida within balance construction period as per terms of lease deed of plot which is up to 23.2.2000. Extension of time for construction of plot and for obtaining occupancy certificate will be granted as per terms of lease deed of plot and as per then prevailing extension policy of NOIDA.
11. That the Transferee shall be bound by the terms and conditions of lease deed of plot executed on 2.4.88, subject to the amendments indicated in the Transfer Memorandum.
xxx
15. That the Transferees shall put the property in the use exclusively for residential purpose and shall not use it for any purpose other than residential.
xxx
17. That the terms and conditions amended by the NOIDA AUTHORITY from time to time shall be binding on the Transferees aforesaid.
6. After completing the construction, the Appellants appear to have rented out the premises to Andhra Bank and Akariti Infotech. As such, both the bank and the company had been carrying on their business from the premises in question. The Development Authority, on 18th January, 2001 and 22nd February, 2001 issued notices to both Andhra Bank and Akariti Infotech to stop commercial use in the said premises within 30 days, failing which action would be taken as per the lease deed. In these notices, it was also stated that there was encroachment in violation of the prescribed building byelaws and the use of residential plot for commercial purpose was in violation of the provisions of the lease deed of the plot. Invoking the provisions of the U.P. Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 (for short, 'the Act'),the Development Authority gave them opportunity to file objections. To these notices, the Appellants not only filed objections but also appeared before the Development Authority and contended that the Development Authority, in furtherance to the proposal to permit running of consulting clinics, banks and guest houses in the residential areas, had permitted such use on the main roads, on payment of 30 per cent of the existing residential rate on per square meter area of plot per annum and had invited suggestions from the general public. Reliance was also placed on certain press reports. Noticing these facts and obviously taking the view that there was no legal sanctity to the alleged change of user, the Development Authority rejected the objections and required the misuse to be stopped and the violation of the building byelaws to be removed within four months. A part of the said order reads as follows:
The terms and conditions of lease deed and transfer deed of plot clearly states that allotted plot shall be used exclusively for residential purposes. The Petitioner changed the land use of plot without intimating to the Authority and did not bother to seek any clarification or obtain permission from the Authority for such change. It is a well known fact that this Authority does not permit commercial activity in the residential plots. This is a classic case of violation of law by the most educated enlightened class of the Country. This class in Noida has tried to change not only the character of Noida but have for self interest destroyed the peace of the Neighbours. It is also possible that the then Bank staff also colluded in the matter and did not bother to see the conditions contained in the lease deed and did not even try to approach the Authority for clarification. In view of the above stated facts and after listening to the Petitioner, it is ordered that representation pleadings of the Petitioner Allottee of Residential Plot No. A-778, Sector-19 stand rejected and the Petitioner is also directed to ensure vacation of bank branch and infotec office from the residential premises and restore the building according to prescribed building bye-law within 4 months (Four Months) from the date of service of this order.
7. As the Petitioner has evaded compliance of terms of lease deed for nearly five months on one pretext or the other, he is also informed that in case of failure to restore the land use of plot within stipulated period, the Authority shall be free to take further action under law WITHOUT FURTHER NOTICE. Orders regarding penalty for misuse of premises will be passed separately.
7. Aggrieved from the aforesaid order, the Appellants filed a writ petition before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. The writ petition preferred by the Appellants came to be dismissed vide order dated 19th January, 2002. It was noticed by the High Court and rightly so, that the Development Authority had invited some suggestions for change of user of residential plots to commercial or mixed user on certain terms and conditions, by bringing certain changes/amendments in its byelaws and policy decisions. This remained at an interim stage and no final decision was taken by any competent authority in accordance with the provisions of the Act. The Development Authority had not undertaken any exercise for the said amendment in accordance with law and had not even sought the approval of the State Government, as required under the law, for change of user or amendment of the byelaws, Master Plan, etc. In fact, the provisions directing forfeiture of property under Section 14 of the Act and imposition of penalty for misuse in terms of Section 15 of the Act were in force. Relying upon judgment of this Court in Munshi Ram v. Union of India MANU/SC/0498/2000 : (2000) 7 SCC 22, the High Court not only dismissed the writ petition but also directed the Development Authority to take immediate and strong action against those who have started using residential plots, wholly or partially, for other non-residential uses. The Appellants, feeling dissatisfied by the judgment of the High Court, have preferred the present appeal before this Court. In order to complete the factual matrix of the case, we may notice that the Appellants have placed on record Annexure P-7, a copy of the public notice dated 30th March, 2000 indicating that there was proposal to grant permission for mixed use consulting clinics, bank branch and guest houses on 18 A.M. wide roads on the conditions stated therein. These conditions also included the provision that fees payable on grant of permission for mixed use of land would be 30 per cent of existing residential rate, on per square meter area of plot, on yearly basis. To this proposal, public opinion was invited and it was stated that objections/suggestions in this regard may be filed in writing in the office of the Additional Chief Executive Officer of the Development Authority. Even hearing was to be granted. In the affidavit filed on behalf of the Respondent-Development Authority on 8th October, 2002, it has been specifically averred that 21 banks were functioning in residential sector in the Development Area under private arrangements with the lessees of the concerned plots and these banks have not obtained any permission or authorization from the Development Authority. Two banks, namely, Oriental Bank of Commerce, Sector 27, Noida and Vijaya Bank, Sector 19, Noida had obtained such permission for a period of five years and three years respectively since 1995 and 1994. These banks had not obtained any permission or renewal thereafter. Show cause notices had been issued to all the banks to wind up their activities from these areas. In para 10 of the affidavit, it had been stated that the Development Authority 'has taken a firm decision to evict all the banks from the residential sectors and notices have been issued to all these 21 banks without exception'. A definite averment has also been made in this affidavit that the functioning of the banks in the residential sectors caused inconvenience and disturbance to the public at large and the Development Authority has earmarked specific areas for making land available to the banks to carry on their commercial activities. They have allotted land to several banks in commercial-cum-institutional and commercial portion of industrial and institutional sectors. Option was given to the 21 banks to function in these areas and that if they would apply for the same, the Development Authority shall consider their cases sympathetically. The Development Authority, specifically and with emphasis, reiterated that banking activities cannot be allowed in residential plots of the residential sector. Another affidavit was filed on behalf of the Development Authority in March 2011, wherein a clear stand was taken that as per the Master Plan, Sector 19 of the Development Area is a residential sector, where the land use is residential alone, neither commercial nor mixed. List of 43 properties in Sector 19, Noida was filed as Annexure-1, where non-residential activities, including banking and medical clinics, were being carried on while Annexure-2 related to other 11 properties being used for other non-residential purposes in Sector 19 itself. There are institutional plots in Sector 19, which had been allotted by the Development Authority for running of nursing homes or commercial activity. An office order was issued on or about 14th May, 2009, in relation to Guest Houses, by the Chief Executive Officer of the Development Authority. However, the same is stated to have been withdrawn immediately thereafter. In other words, according to the Respondents, there is no order or sanction operative and binding as of now, which permits any user other than residential in the residential sector.
8. Having stated the facts, we may now examine the relevant provisions of law. The State of Uttar Pradesh had enacted the law to provide for creation of an Authority for development of certain areas of the State into industrial and urban townships and for matters connected therewith. 'Authority' had been defined under Section 2(b) of the Act to mean the Authority constituted under Section 3 of the Act. Section 3 required the State Government to constitute, for the purposes of the Act, an authority for any industrial Development Area in terms of that Section. Section 6 of the Act related to functions of the Authority while Section 7 mentions the powers of the Authority in respect of transfer of land. In terms of these statutory provisions, the object of the Authority was to secure the planned development of industrial Development Area and the Authority was required to perform certain functions in terms of Section 6(2), which reads as under:
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the objects of the Authority, the Authority shall perform the following functions--
(a) to acquire land in the industrial development area, by agreement or through proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for the purposes, of this Act;
(b) to prepare a plan for the development of the industrial development area;
(c) to demarcate and develop sites for industrial, commercial and residential purposes according to the plan;
(d) to provide infra-structure for industrial, commercial and residential purposes;
(e) to provide amenities;
(f) to allocate and transfer either by way of sale or lease or otherwise plots of land for industrial, commercial or residential purposes;
(g) to regulate the erection of buildings and setting up of industries; and
(h) to lay down the purpose for which a particular site or plot of land shall be used, namely for industrial or commercial or residential purpose or any other specified purpose in such area.
9. In terms of Section 8 of the Act, for the purposes of proper planning and development of the industrial development area, the Authority had the power to issue directions, as it consider necessary, regarding the factors stated therein, including restriction of use on any site for a purpose other than for which it has been allocated. Every transferee in whose favour the land was transferred was bound to comply with the directions issued as expeditiously as possible and was obliged to erect the building or to take such necessary steps to comply with the directions in accordance with Section 8(2) of the Act. No person could raise construction, erect or occupy the building in contravention of the building Regulations. The Authority has been vested with the powers to make Regulations with the previous approval of the State Government in terms of Section 19 of the Act, while the State Government may, by notification, frame Rules for the purposes of the Act as contemplated under Section 18 of the Act.
10. Section 2(d) of the Act defines 'Industrial Development Area' to be an area declared as such by the State Government by notification. Section 6(2)(b) requires the Authority to prepare a plan for the development of an industrial development area while Section 6(2)(h) enjoins the Authority to lay down the purpose for which a particular site or plot of land shall be used, namely for industrial or commercial or residential or any other specified purpose. The power to transfer lands is also given to the Authority. In terms of Section 19 read with Section 6 of the Act, the New Okhla Industrial Development Area was notified and the Authority framed the Regulations for the purposes of proper planning and development of that area. These were called the New Okhla Industrial Development Area (Preparation and Finalization of Plan) Regulations, 1991 (hereafter referred to as 'the Regulations'). Regulation 2 of the Regulations defines various kinds of uses including 'Land Use'. 'Land Use' under Regulation 2(g) means the use of any land or part thereof in the industrial development area for industrial, residential, institutional, commercial, public water bodies, organized recreational open spaces, public and semi-public buildings, agriculture and other like purposes. In contradistinction to the 'Commercial Use', 'Industrial Use' 'Institutional Use' and 'Public Use', the 'Residential Use' has been defined under Regulation 2(1)(k) which reads as under: -
(k) 'Residential Use' means the use of any land or building or part thereof for human habitation and such other uses incidental to residential uses.
11. The expression 'Sector' has also been defined in Regulation 2(l) to mean any one of the divisions in which the industrial development area or part thereof may be divided, for the purposes of development under the Act. Regulation 3 enjoins upon the Authority a duty to prepare a Draft Plan for industrial development areas in terms of Regulation 3(1) to 3(6). Under Regulation 4, the Plan has to include sector plans into which such industrial area has been divided. It should also depict the residential use by allocating the area of land for housing, for different and defined densities and plotted development for different categories of households in terms of Regulation 4(1)(b)(ii). Similarly, it should also state the commercial use, public use, agricultural use and other purposes as the Authority may deem fit. The procedure for finalization of the Draft Plan is also contemplated under Chapter III, Regulations 5 to 11 of the Regulations. The Regulations postulate that the Authority, after preparation of the Draft Plan, shall, by public notice, invite objections and suggestions to be filed before the date notified but not earlier than 30 days from the date of publication. A proper enquiry and hearing is contemplated where after the Draft Plan is to be finalized in terms of Regulation 9 and the date of commencement of the Plan is to be specified in terms of Regulation 10. The Authority has the power to amend the Plans but this power to amend is restricted in its scope. Regulation 11 empowers the Authority to do so, but no such amendment can be made which would result in important alteration in the character of the Plan and which do not relate to the extent of land use or standards of population density. Even thereafter, it is required to follow the prescribed procedure. Regulation 11 reads as under:
11. Amendment of the Plan. - (1) The Authority may make such amendments in the Plan which do not effect important alteration in the character of the Plan and which do not relate to the extent of land use or standards of population density.
(2) Before making any amendment in the Plan under Sub-section (1), the Authority shall publish a notice in at least one newspaper having circulation in the development are inviting objections and suggestions from any affected person with regard to the proposed amendment before such date as may be specified in the notice and shall consider all objections that may be received.
(3) Every amendment made under this Regulation shall be published in any of the manner specified in Regulation 5 and the amendment shall come into operation either on the date of the first publication or on such other date as the Authority may fix.
(4) The Authority shall not make during the specified period in which the Plan is to remain effective, such amendment(s) in the Plan which affects important alteration in the character of the Plan and which relates to the extent of the land sue or standards of population density.
12. It is not in dispute before us that the Development Authority had finalized the Master Plan in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Regulations, which was titled as 'Master Plan, NOIDA, 2001'. This Plan is in force and is binding on all concerned.
13. Besides the above provisions of the Act and the Regulations framed there under by the Development Authority, the Development Authority has also framed building Regulations and directions, which are termed as 'The New Okhla Industrial Development Area Building Regulations and Directions, 2006 (for short 'Regulations 2006)'. These have been primarily framed as byelaws in relation to the constructions, restrictions thereof and type of user. Under Regulation 3.12 (h), a residential building is explained as under:
(h) 'Residential building' refers to any building in which sleeping accommodation is provided for normal residential purpose with or without cooking or dining or both facilities and includes one or two or multi family dwelling, lodging or rooming houses, dormitories, apartment houses, flats and hostels.
14. In distinction to the 'residential building', an 'industrial building' is the building or part thereof, in which product or materials of all counts and properties are fabricated, assembled, manufactured etc. An 'institutional building' refers to a building or a part of a building which is used for purposes such as medical or other treatment or care of persons suffering from physical or mental illness, disease or infirmity and includes hospital, institutions and sanitaria etc. while a 'business building' refers to a building or part of a building which is used for transaction of business like Banks, Commercial office, etc. In other words, each building proposed to be used for a definite purpose has to meet different standards, FAR (Floor Area Ratio) and byelaws. These purposes are incapable of being confused with each other or even used interchangeably. Respective purposes have been defined in unambiguous terms in the byelaws, having distinct implications.
15. It does not appear to be the scheme of the provisions of the Act, the Regulations and the bye laws, including the Regulations, 2006 that each of these purposes or buildings can be understood or used interchangeably. In fact, each has distinct features and it does not lie in the jurisdiction of the Development Authority to permit such conversion in users, beyond the scope of the Master Plan, the byelaws and the statutory provisions. Regulation 3.22 of the Regulations, 2006 explain the word 'conversion' to mean the change of an occupancy or change in building structure or part thereof, resulting into change of space or use requiring additional occupancy certificate.
16. The change in user of the building is, therefore, violative not only of the Regulations, byelaws and the provisions of the Act, but is also contrary to the law governing erection of the building. The legislative purpose that emerges from the scheme of the Act and other relevant provisions is to keep a residential building separate from commercial and other buildings. This would necessarily imply that the jurisdiction of the Development Authority to permit different user in violation of this statute and the Regulations is not contemplated in law.
Contentions
17. On behalf of the Appellants/lessees/users, in the cases before us, it has been contended that the activity of banking or running of clinics is being carried on by them for a long period. Thus, this has been impliedly permitted by the Development Authority. It is also their contention that a public notice had been issued by the Development Authority, permitting mixed user and, thus, the Appellants/lessees/users are bonafidely carrying on activities of running banks/nursing homes/other commercial activities in the residential sectors. Reliance has been placed upon Public Notice dated 30th March, 2000 and also that vide notification dated 4th December, 2010 plots allotted in the developed sector to farmers under a Rehabilitation Scheme had permitted establishment of guest houses, restaurants, banks, professional offices, day care centres etc. vide notification dated 4th December, 2010.
18. It is also the contention of the Appellants that neither the byelaws, rules and Regulations nor the layout plan of the Development Authority, in any manner, impede or place any kind of bar on carrying out banking activity in the residential sectors.
19. While relying upon the judgments of this Court in the case of Hari Rao v. N. Govindachari and Ors. MANU/SC/0565/2005 : (2005) 7 SCC 643, and Dev Brat Sharma v. Jagjit Mehta (1990) Supp. SCC 724, it was contended that such use does not amount to change of user as it is permissible to carry out professional or clinical activity in the residential houses and, therefore, the notice of termination issued and/or cancellation of the lease deeds, being arbitrary and without application of mind, was vitiated in law.
20. Lastly, it was contended that as there is inadequacy of space for banks, clinics and other commercial offices in the Development Area, the present user is need-based and is in the larger public interest. According to the Appellants, the number of plots for the banks is not sufficient to meet the needs of the public in the residential sectors and no alternative spaces are available for relocation of the banks. The lease rent and other charges payable to the Development Authority for both these categories have a considerable difference. Thus, it has the impact of creating heavy liability and inconvenience to the Appellants, particularly if they are forced to shift to commercial or institutional sectors/pockets.
21. On the contra, the contention on behalf of the Development Authority is that banking activity is impermissible in the residential sectors. It causes inconvenience to public and disturbance to the residents. Referring to the Meeting dated 17th December, 2002 of the Committee of the Officers, the stand taken is that banking activity cannot be allowed in the residential portions of the residential sectors and to this effect, a notice was also published.
22. Further, the contention is that the power of the Development Authority to demarcate and develop sites, to lay down the purpose for which a particular site or plot of land shall be used, is controlled by the specific provisions of the Act and the Regulations framed there under. Sections 6(2)(b) and 7 of the Act are stated to be the source of power in this regard. It is also the contention that in the Master Plan, 2001, subsequent Plans and the Zoning Regulations, all residential sectors are marked in yellow colour. Sector 19 of the Development Area, where the subject matter of this case is located, is a residential sector. Thus, it can only be used for the residential purpose.
23. The Learned Counsel appearing for the lessee/transferees had relied upon the judgments of this Court in the cases of Hari Rao (supra) and Dev Brat Sharma (supra). Both these judgments have no application to the present case, on facts or in law. These were cases of eviction under the respective Rent Restriction Acts. In one case, this Court held that putting up of a clinic in a part of the house by a doctor was not change of user, while in the other, where the premises had been rented out for a commercial purpose of selling of leather goods, change of the industry to a garment and cloth business, was not considered as change of user. We are unable to understand as to how the lessees in the present case can derive any benefit from these judgments. In the present case, we have a clear law in force and that law is neither similar in purpose nor linguistically identical to the Rent Restriction Acts of the respective States. The change of user, in the case in hand, has to be seen in light of the Master Plan, the Regulations and the provisions of the Act. What may not be change of user under the Rent Restriction Act, as the rights of the parties therein are governed by the contract between the parties and the grounds of eviction taken by them, may be a change of user within the scope of development Plan and the Regulations.
24. In light of the contentions raised, first of all, it will be appropriate for this Court to examine the scheme of the Act and the Regulations in question. Under the provisions of the Act, the Development Authority is obliged to notify an industrial development area. The very object of the Development Authority is to secure the planned development of the industrial development area and the first and foremost step in this direction is to prepare a Plan for development of the industrial development area. This development Plan is to demarcate and develop sites for industrial, commercial and residential purposes. The land which falls within the jurisdiction of the Development Authority and is part of the development Plan can be transferred in terms of Section 7 of the Act by auction, allotment or otherwise, on such terms and conditions as the Development Authority may state and subject to any rules that may be made there under. No person can erect or occupy any building in an industrial development area in contravention to any building Regulation. Under Section 6(2) of the Act, the Development Authority is empowered to make Regulations to regulate the erection of the buildings and Section 6(2)(b) specifically authorizes the Development Authority to make Regulation providing for the layout Plan of the building, whether industrial, commercial or residential. The transfer of the land has to be as per the terms and conditions contained in the lease deed executed by the Development Authority in favour of the transferee. But this all has to be subject to the provisions of the Act and the Regulations framed there under. It has to be clearly understood that the lease deed has to be in consonance with law and cannot be in conflict with the provisions of the law. Section 14 of the Act empowers the Development Authority to resume the site or building so transferred and further forfeit whole or any part of the money paid in respect thereof, if the lessee commits breach of the terms and conditions of the lease. No provision of the Act has been brought to our notice which provides for the manner and method to be adopted by the Development Authority for preparation of the development Plan in accordance with the provisions of the Act. This is where the Regulations come into play. Under Regulations 3 and 4 of the Regulations, the Draft Plan has to be prepared by the Development Authority for development of an industrial area, which will include a sector plan. The meaning of 'residential use' under the Regulations is a restricted one and is incapable of being given a wide connotation. It means the use of any land or building or part thereof for human habitation and such other uses incidental to the residential use. The very language of Regulation 2(1)(k) of the Regulations clearly depicts the intent of the framers that the expression 'residential use' is not to be understood in its wider sense, in fact, it would require strict construction because all other uses have been separately defined. The different kinds of uses, therefore, have to be understood only in terms of the explanation or meaning given to them under the Regulations. If unduly wide meaning is given to the expression 'residential use', then it is bound to cause overlap between the other uses. It would cause unnecessary confusion. Thus, each use has to be understood as per its plain language and there is no need for the Development Authority or, for that matter, even for the courts, to expand the meaning given to such expressions. The expression 'such other use incidental to residential use' in Regulation 2(1)(k) has to take its colour from the use of the building for human habitation. In other words, the latter part of the Regulation has to be read ejusdem generis to the earlier part of that Regulation.
25. The development Plan has to be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Regulations framed there under. As already noticed, the Development Authority has to prepare the Draft Plan, give public notice thereof, invite objections and thereupon conduct an inquiry and hearing as contemplated under the law, before preparing a final development Plan. This final development Plan is a statutory requirement which has to be prepared as ordained under the provisions of Section 6(2)(b) of the Act read with Regulations 5 to 11 of the Regulations. This Plan necessarily provides for a particular use or purpose of any area/site, namely industrial, commercial institutional or residential. The notified development Plan has a legal sanction and provisions contained therein are mandatory in nature. They are incapable of being altered or varied without following the due process prescribed in law. Reference can be made to the judgment of this Court in the case of NOIDA Entrepreneurs Association v. NOIDA and Ors. (2011) 6 SCC 527. Further, this Court, in the case of NDMC and Ors. v. Tanvi Trading and Credit Private Limited and Ors. MANU/SC/3683/2008 : (2008) 8 SCC 765, not only took the view that even the interim guidelines issued in relation to Luytens' Building Zone till finalization of the Master Plan for Delhi would have statutory force and be treated mandatory, but also that such guidelines, so far as consistent with the Master Plan, would continue to be binding even after coming into force of the Master Plan.
26. It has to be noticed at this stage that the development Plan prepared in accordance with the Regulations take the statutory colour in terms of Section 6(2)(b) of the Act and, therefore, its alteration by an executive order would be impermissible. Even when a Master Plan is to be amended, the entire prescribed procedure must be followed. The power to amend should be exercised only in consonance with the settled norms without going beyond the original power of the Development Authority to make such Plan in accordance with the provisions of the Act. The power to amend cannot be used to frustrate the provisions of the statute. Regulations, being subordinate legislation must fall in line with the principal provisions of the Act and in no way should be detrimental to the provisions and the legislative scheme of the Act.
27. In the case of M.C. Mehta v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0488/2004 : (2004) 6 SCC 588 dealing with the question of unauthorized industrial activity in residential area in Delhi, the plea raised for in situ regularization of areas with 70 per cent industrial use was not accepted by this Court, holding that regularization would have adverse impact on the law abiders. This Court also held that the land cannot be permitted to be used contrary to the stipulated user except by amendment of Master Plan, after due consideration of the provisions of the Act and the Rules. Inaction by the Government authorities means permitting the unauthorized use, contrary to law.
28. The authorities while reconsidering such matters are expected to act reasonably and cautiously. They deal with larger public interest and, therefore, have a responsibility to act with greater degree of sensitivity and proper application of mind. If the Development Authority aids the violation of the statutory provisions, it will be a perversity in the discharge of statutory obligations on the part of the Development Authority. The public interest, as codified in the statutory Regulations and the provisions of the Act, should control the conduct of the Development Authority and its decision making process, rather than popular public demand guiding the exercise of its discretion, that too, in a somewhat arbitrary manner. To illustrate the dimensions of exercise of such powers, we may refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of Bangalore Medical Trust v. B.S. Mudappa and Ors. MANU/SC/0426/1991 : (1991) 4 SCC 54, wherein this Court was concerned with the provisions of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 with particular reference to Sections 33, 38 and 38(A) of that Act. A site intended for a public park was sought to be converted into a hospital/nursing home, under the garb of the latter being a 'civic amenity'. This Court formed the view that such conversion of an open space reserved under the scheme for a public park into a civic amenity site by constructing hospital and allotment of the site to persons or body of persons, was opposed to the objects of the Act and would be ultra vires the same. This Court held as under:
46... No one howsoever high can arrogate to himself or assume without any authorisation express or implied in law a discretion to ignore the rules and deviate from rationality by adopting a strained or distorted interpretation as it renders the action ultra vires and bad in law. Where the law requires an authority to act or decide, 'if it appears to it necessary' or if he is 'of opinion that a particular act should be done' then it is implicit that it should be done objectively, fairly and reasonably. Decisions affecting public interest or the necessity of doing it in the light of guidance provided by the Act and rules may not require intimation to person affected yet the exercise of discretion is vitiated if the action is bereft of rationality, lacks objective and purposive approach. The action or decision must not only be reached reasonably and intelligibly but it must be related to the purpose for which power is exercised. The purpose for which the Act was enacted is spelt out from the Preamble itself which provides for establishment of the Authority for development of the city of Bangalore and areas adjacent thereto. To carry out this purpose the development scheme framed by the Improvement Trust was adopted by the Development Authority. Any alteration in this scheme could have been made as provided in Sub-section (4) of Section 19 only if it resulted in improvement in any part of the scheme. As stated earlier a private nursing home could neither be considered to be an amenity nor it could be considered improvement over necessity like a public park. The exercise of power, therefore, was contrary to the purpose for which it is conferred under the statute.