MANU/SC/0291/1993
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petn. Nos. 90 of 1992 with 312 of 1993
Decided On: 14.05.1993
Appellants:R.K. Jain
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.M. Ahmadi, M.M. Punchhi and K. Ramaswamy, JJ.
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Customs
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 74(2); CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 217(3), CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 32
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 142, Constitution Of India - Article 142(1), Constitution Of India - Article 144, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 154(1), Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 19(a), Constitution Of India - Article 217, Constitution Of India - Article 217(3), Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 227, Constitution Of India - Article 309, Constitution Of India - Article 311, Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 323 A, Constitution Of India - Article 323-A, Constitution Of India - Article 323A, Constitution Of India - Article 323B, Constitution Of India - Article 356, Constitution Of India - Article 43, Constitution Of India - Article 52, Constitution Of India - Article 53, Constitution Of India - Article 53(1), Constitution Of India - Article 73, Constitution Of India - Article 73(1), Constitution Of India - Article 74(1), Constitution Of India - Article 74(2), Constitution Of India - Article 75, Constitution Of India - Article 75(1), Constitution Of India - Article 75(3), Constitution Of India - Article 75(4), Constitution Of India - Article 77, Constitution Of India - Article 77(1), Constitution Of India - Article 77(3), Constitution Of India - Article 78
Disposition:
Disposed of
Cases Referred:
U.P. v. Raj Narain, MANU/SC/0032/1975; Maganbhai Ishwarbhai Patel v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0044/1969; Shamsher Singh v. State of Punjab, MANU/SC/0073/1974; Union of India v. Jyoti Prakash, MANU/SC/0061/1971; Union of India v. Paras Laminates Pvt. Ltd., MANU/SC/0173/1991; Sri Raghunathrao Ganpatrao v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0908/1994; Krishna Swami v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0222/1993; S.P. Sampat Kumar v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0851/1987; M.B. Majumdar v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0404/1990; J.B. Chopra v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0459/1986; Union of India v. Sankal Chand Himatlal Sheth, MANU/SC/0065/1977; Shri Kumar Padma Prasad v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0227/1992
Authorities Referred:
Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Ed., Vol.8
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  28

Mentioned
  27

Case Note:
Supreme Court Directive on Tribunal's working (Relevant Extracts only)

Cegat has to be as effective as High Court (sic) and efficiency. Its personnel should have (sic) qualifications. High level team (sic) working. Law Commission to review set up of various Tribunals. CESA: S. 35B; Cus. Act: S. 129A.

Held; CEGAT, as an alternative statutory authority, is expected to be as effective as a High Court. In order to maintain its independence and secure efficient judicial administration, as also to instill confidence in the litigating public with respect to the CEGAT, its personnel should have some legal training and experience at the Bar. "So long as the alternative institutional mechanism or authority set up by an Act is not less effective than the High Court, it is consistent with constitutional scheme. The faith of the people is the bed-rock on which the edifice of judicial review and efficacy of the adjudication are founded. The alternative arrangement must, therefore, be effective and efficient. For inspiring confidence and trust in the litigant public they must have an assurance that the person deciding their causes is totally and completely free from the influence or pressure from the Govt. To maintain independence and imperatively it is necessary that the personnel should have at least modicum of legal training, learning and experience. Selection of competent and roper people instill people's faith and trust in the office and help to build up reputation and acceptability. Judicial independence which is essential and imperative is secured and independent and impartial administration of justice is assured. Absence thereof only may get both law and procedure wronged and wrong headed views of the facts and may likely to give rise to nursing grievance of injustice. Therefore, functional fitness, experience at the Bar and aptitudinal approach are fundamental for efficient judicial adjudication. Then only as a repository of the confidence, as its duty, the tribunal would properly and efficiently interpret the law and apply the law to the given set of facts. Absence thereof would be repugnant or derogatory to the Constitution. ......The daily practice in the courts not only gives training to Advocates to interpret the rules but also adopt the conventions of courts. Inbuilt experience would play vital role in the administration of justice and strengthen and-develop the qualities, intellectual and character, forbearance and of patience, temper and resilience which are very important in the practice of law. Practising Advocates from the Bar generally do endow with those qualities to discharge judicial functions. Specialised nature of work gives them added advantage and gives benefit to broaden the perspectives."

2. CEGAT--Appointment of President--A sitting or retired senior Judge should be appointed as the President. The relevant Rules should be suitably amended particularly with regard to age of superannuation and perks. "......sub-rule (4) of Rule 10 of the Rules needs a suitable change to make it sufficiently attractive for sitting High Court Judges to accept appointment as the President of the CEGAT, We also agree with our learned Brother that to instill the confidence of the litigating public in the CEGAT, the Government must make a sincere effort to appoint a sitting Judge of the High Court as a President of the CEGAT in consultation of the Chief Justice of India and if a sitting Judge is not available the choice must fall on a retired Judge as far as possible. This would be consistent with the assurance given by the Finance Department as is reflected in the letter of Shri Chandrachud, (sic).

3. CEGAT-Appointment of present incumbent as (sic) the Chief Justice of India consulted nor were the directives issued by the Supreme Court followed. Solemn assurances given to Parliament were also overlooked. But the Court does not question the validity of the appointment so long as the person appointed possesses the prescribed qualifications and is eligible for the appointment. "Assuming for the sake of argument that these allegations are factually accurate, this Court cannot sit in judgment over the choice of the person made by the Central Government for appointment as a President if the person chosen is qualified and eligible for appointment under the Rules. We, therefore, agree with our learned Brother that this Court cannot sit in judgment over the wisdom of the Central Government in the choice of the person to be appointed as a President so long as the person chosen possesses the prescribed qualification and is otherwise eligible for appointment. We, therefore, cannot interfere with the appointment of respondent No. 3 on the ground that his track record was poor or because of adverse reports on which account his appointment as a High Court Judge had not materialised. ...Admittedly Chief Justice of India was not consulted before appointing Sri Harish Chander as President. Several affidavits filed on behalf of the Govt. do not also bear our whether the directions issued by this court even brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Prime Minister before finalising the appointment of Sri Harish Chander. The solemn assurance given to the Parliament that the Tribunal bears judicious blend by appointment of a High Court Judge as President was given a go-bye. While making statutory rules the executive appears to have made the appointment of a sitting or retired High Court Judge as President unattractive and directory frustrating the legislative animation. A sitting Judge when is entitled to continue in his office up to 62 years would he be willing to opt to serve as President, if his superannuation as President is coterminous with 62 years. He would be attracted only if he is given extended three years more tenure after his superannuation. But Rule 10(3) says that the total period of the tenure of the President by a sitting or retired judge as "a period of three years or till he attains the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier", i.e. coterminous with superannuation as a Judge of the High Court. The proviso is only discretionary at the whim of the executive depleting independence and as an exception to the rule. Thereby practically the spirit of the Act, the solemn assurance given by the Govt. to the Parliament kindling hope in the litigant public to have a sitting or a retired judge appointed as President has been frustrated deflecting the appointment of a judicially trained judge to exercise judicial review. We are constrained to observe that the rules, though statutory, were so made as to defeat the object of the Act."

4. CEGAT--Allegations of malfunctioning--A high-level team should be set up immediately to review the working of CEGAT and to suggest remedial measures. "The allegations made by Shri R.K. Jain in regard to the working of the CEGAT are grave and the authorities can ill afford to turn a Nelson's eye to those allegations made by a person who is fairly well conversant with the internal working of the Tribunal. Refusal to inquire into such grave allegations, some of which are capable of verification, can only betray indifference and lack of a sense of urgency to tone up the working of the Tribunal. Fresh articles have appeared in the Excise Law Times which point to the sharp decline in the functioning of the CEGAT pointing to a serious management crises. It is high time that the administrative machinery which is charged with the duty to supervise the working of the CEGAT wakes up from its slumber and initiates prompt action to examine the allegations by appointing a high level team which would immediately inspect the CEGAT, identify the causes for the crises and suggest remedial measures. This cannot brook delay. .......There are persistent allegations against malfunctioning of the CEGAT and against Harish Chander himself. Though we exercised self-restraint to assume the role of an Investigator to charter out the ills surfaced, suffice to say that the Union Govt. cannot turn a blind eye to the persistent public demands and we direct to swing into action, an in-depth enquiry made expeditiously by an officer or team of officers to control the malfunctioning of the institution. It is expedient that the Govt. should immediately take action in the matter and have fresh look. .......A report on the actions taken in this behalf be submitted to this court."

5. Tribunals--Law Commission may review the working of the various Tribunals and suggest measures for improving the quality of their functioning, so that they serve the objectives for which they were created. ".........Acts have been enacted whereunder tribunals have been constituted for dispensation of justice. Sufficient time has passed and experience gained in these last few years for taking stock of the situation with a view to finding out if they have served the purpose and objectives for which they were constituted. Complaints have been heard in regard to the functioning of other tribunals as well and it is time that a body like the Law Commission of India has a comprehensive look-in with a view to suggesting measures for their improved functioning. That body can also suggest changes in the different statutes and evolve a model on the basis whereof tribunals may be constituted or reconstituted with a view to ensuring greater independence. An intensive and extensive study needs to be undertaken by the Law Commission in regard to the constitution of tribunals under various statutes with a view to ensuring their independence so that the public confidence in such tribunals may increase and the quality of their performance may improve. We strongly recommend to the Law Commission of India to undertake such an exercise on priority basis. .......it is necessary to express our anguish over, the ineffectively of the alternative mechanism devised for judicial review. The Judicial review and remedy are fundamental rights of the citizens. The dispensation of justice by the tribunals is much to be desired. We are not doubting the ability of the members or Vice-Chairman (non-Judges) who may be experts in their regular service. But judicial adjudication is a special process and would efficiently be administered by advocate Judges. The remedy of appeal by special leave under Art. 136 to this Court also proved to be costly and prohibitive and far-flung distance too is working as constant constraint to litigant public who could ill afford to reach this court. An appeal to a Bench of two Judges of the respective High Courts over the orders of the tribunals within its territorial jurisdiction on questions of law would assuage a growing feeling of injustice of those who can ill afford to approach the Supreme Court, Equally the need for recruitment of members of the Bar to man the Tribunals as well as the working system by the tribunals need fresh look and regular monitoring is necessary. Except body like the Law Commission of India would make an in-depth study in this behalf including the desirability to bring CEGAT under the control of Law and Justice Department in line with Income-tax Appellate Tribunal and to make appropriate urgent recommendations to the Govt. of India who should take remedial steps by an appropriate legislation to overcome the handicaps and difficulties and make the tribunals effective and efficient instruments for making Judicial review efficacious, inexpensive and satisfactory."
Ratio Decidendi:
"Depth enquiry must be made expeditiously to control mal-functioning of institution."
ORDER
Authored By : A.M. Ahmadi, K. Ramaswamy
A.M. Ahmadi, J.
1. We have had the benefit of the industry, erudition and exposition of the constitutional and jurisprudential aspects of law on the various questions urged before us in the judgment of our esteemed Brother K. Ramaswamy, J. But while concurring with the hereinafter mentioned conclusions recorded by him we would like to say a few words to explain our points of view. Since the facts have been set out in detail by our learned Brother we would rest content by giving an abridged preface which we consider necessary.
2. It nil began with the receipt of a letter dated December 26, 1991, from Shri R.K. Jain, Editor, Excise Law Times, addressed to the then Chief Justice of India, Shri M.H. Kania, J., complaining that as the Customs, Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal for, short 'the CEGAT') was without a President for the last over six months the of functioning of the Tribunal was adversely affected, in that, the Benches sit for hardly two hours or so, the sittings commence late at about 10.50 a.m., there is a tendency to adjourn cases on one pretext or the other so much so that even passing of interim orders, like stay orders, etc., is postponed and inordinately delayed, and the general tendency is to work for only four days in a week. The work culture is just not there and the environmental degradation that has taken place is reflected in the letter of Shri G. Sankaran dated June 3, 1991 who prematurely resigned as the President of the CEGAT. Lastly, he says that there were nearly 42, 000 appeals and approximately 2000 stay pituitaries pending in the CEGAT involving revenue worth crores of rupees, which will remain blocked for long. Three directions were sought, namely,
(i) the immediate appointment of the President to the CEGAT, preferably a senior High Court Judge;
(ii) order an enquiry into the malfunctioning of the CEGAT; and
(iii) issue all other directions as your Lordship may deem fit and necessary.
3. This letter was directed to be treated as Public Interest Litigation and notice was issued to the Union of India restricted to relief No. (i) i.e. in regard to the appointment of the President of the CEGAT. On April 29, 1992, the learned Additional Solicitor General informed the Court that the appointment of the President was made. On the next date of hearing the relevant file on which the decision regarding appointment was made was produced in a sealed envelope in Court which we directed to be kept in safe custody as apprehension was expressed that the file may be tampered with. The focus which was initially on the working of the CEGAT and in particular against the conduct and behaviour of one of its Members now shifted to the legality and validity of the appointment of respondent No. 3 as its President. Serious allegations were made against respondent No. 3 and his competence to hold the post was questioned. It was contended that his appointment was made in violation of the Rules and convention found mentioned in the message of Shri Y.V. Chandrachud, the then Chief Justice of India, dated October 5, 1992 forwarded on the occasion of the inauguration of the CEGAT. The further allegation made is that even though High Court judges were available no serious attempt was made to requisition the services of one of them for appointment as President of the CEGAT. To put a quietus of the entire matter at an early date we called the file from the Registry on May 4, 1992 but when we were about to peruse the same the learned Additional Solicitor General contended that the Court cannot inspect it because he desired to claim privilege'. We, therefore, directed that a formal application may be made in that behalf before the next date of hearing and returned the file to enable the making of such an application. Accordingly, the then Finance Secretary filed an affidavit claiming privilege under sections 123 and 124, Evidence Act, and Article 74(2) of the Constitution. The Minister of State in the Finance Department was also directed to file an affidavit in support of the claim for privilege which he did. It is in this context that the question of privilege arose in the present proceedings.
4. Our learned Brother Ramaswamy, J. dealt with this question elaborately. After referring to the provisions of the relevant statutes and the Constitution as well as the case law of both foreign and Indian courts, the authoritative text books, etc. he has concluded as under:
Having perused the file and given our anxious consideration we are of the opinion that one the facts of the case... it is not necessary to disclose the contents of the records of the petitioner or his counsel
We are in respectful agreement with this conclusion recorded by our learned Brother though not entirely for all the reasons which have weighed with him.
5. On the question of appointment of respondent No. 3 as the President of the CEGAT we must notice a few provisions contained in the CEGAT Members (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1987 (hereinafter called 'the Rules'). Rule 2(c) defines a member, to include the President of the CEGAT also; Rule 3 prescribes the qualifications for appointment and Rule 6 sets out the method of recruitment of a member through a Selection Committee consisting of a Judge of the Supreme Court of India nominated by the Chief Justice of India, Rule 10 provides for the appointment of the President. It says that the Central Government shall appoint one of the members to be the President. Sub-rule (2) then provides as under:
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 6, a sitting or retired judge of a High Court may also be appointed by the Central Government as a member and President simultaneously.
Sub-rule (4) and the proviso thereto bear reproduction:
(4). Where a serving judge of a High Court is appointed as a member and President, he shall hold office as President for a period of three years from the date of his appointment or till he attain the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier: Provided that where a retired judge of a High Court above the age of 62 years is appointed as President, he shall hold office for such period not exceeding three years as may be determined by the Central Government at the time of appointment or re-appointment.
It will thus be seen that the rules empower the Central Government to appoint any member as the President of the CEGAT. It is true that under Sub-rule (4), a serving judge and under the proviso thereto, a retired judge, can also be appointed a member and President simultaneously. In the case of a serving judge his age of superannuation is fixed at 62 years but in the case of a retired judge he may be appointed for a period of three years at the most. Insofar as a serving High Court Judge is concerned, he holds office until he attains the age of 62 years, vide Article 217 of the Constitution. It, therefore, beats common sense why a sitting Judge of the High Court would opt to serve as the President of the CEGAT if he is to retire at the same age without any benefit. On the contrary he would lose certain perks which are attached to the office of a High Court Judge. Even status-wise he would suffer as his decision would be subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution. He may agree to accept the offer only if he had an extended tenure of atleast three years. We are, therefore, in agreement with our learned brother that Sub-rule (4) of Rule 10 of the Rules needs a suitable change to make it sufficiently attractive for sitting High Court Judges to accept appointment as the President of the CEGAT. We also agree with our learned Brother that to instill the confidence of the litigating public in the CEGAT, the Government must make a sincere effort to appoint a sitting Judge of the High Court as a President of the CEGAT in consultation of the Chief Justice of India and if a sitting Judge is not available the choice must fall on a retired Judge as far as possible. This would be consistent with the assurance given by the Finance Department as is reflected in the letter of Shri Chandrachud, extract wherefrom is reproduced by our learned Brother in his judgment.
6. Shri Harish Chandra was a Senior Vice-President when the question of filling up the vacancy of the President came up for consideration. He was fully qualified for the post under the Rules. No challenge is made on the count. Under Rule 10(1) the Central Government is conferred the power to appoint one of the Members to be the President. Since the validity of the Rule is not questioned there can be no doubt that the central Government was entitled to appoint respondent No. 3 as the President. But it was said that the track record of respondent No. 3 was poor and he was hardly fit to hold the post of the President of the CEGAT. It has been averred that respondent No. 3 had been in the past proposed for appointment as a Judge of the Delhi High Court but his appointment did not materialise due to certain adverse reports. Assuming for the sake of argument that these allegations are factually accurate, this Court cannot sit in judgment over the choice of the person made by the Central Government for appointment as a President if the person chosen is qualified and eligible for appointment under the Rules. We, therefore, agree with our learned Brother that this Court cannot sit in judgment over the wisdom of the Central Government in the choice of the person to be appointed as a President so long as the person chosen possesses the prescribed qualification and is otherwise eligible for appointment. We, therefore, cannot interfere with the appointment of respondent No. 3 on the ground that his track record was poor or because of adverse reports on which account his appointment as a High court Judge had not materialised.
7. The allegations made by Shri R.K. Jain in regard to the working of the CEGAT are grave and the authorities can ill afford to turn a Nelson's eye to those allegations made by a person who is fairly well conversant with the internal working of the Tribunal. Refusal to inquire into such grave allegations, some of which are capable of verification, can only betray indifference and lack of a sense of urgency to tone up the working of the Tribunal. Fresh articles have appeared in the Excise Law Times which point to the sharp decline in the functioning of the CEGAT pointing to a serious management crises. It is high time that the administrative machinery which is charged with the duty to supervise the working of the CEGAT makes-up from its slumber and initiates prompt action to examine the allegations by appointing a high level team which would immediately inspect the CEGAT, identify the causes for the crises and suggest remedial measures. This cannot brook delay.
8. Lastly, the time is ripe for taking stock of the working of the various Tribunals set up in the country after the insertion of Article 323A and 323B in the Constitution. A sound justice delivery system is a sine quo-non for the efficient governance of a country wedded to the rule of law. An independent and impartial justice delivery system in which the litigating public has faith and confidence alone can delivery the goods.