MANU/SC/0212/1979
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Criminal Appeals Nos. 512 and 513 of 1978
Decided On: 09.02.1979
Appellants:Rajendra Prasad
Vs.
Respondent:State of Uttar Pradesh
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.P. Sen, D.A. Desai and V.R. Krishna Iyer, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: R.K. Garg, S.K. Bagga, Amicus Curiae, P.K. Pillai, Amicus, D.P. Uniyal and M.V. Goswami, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: K.R. Nambiar, Adv.
Subject: Criminal
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 302
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 129; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 234; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 235; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 235(2); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 345(3); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 354; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 354(3); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 360; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 366; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 367; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 367(5); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 368(a); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 37; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 43; Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 141, Constitution Of India - Article 161, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 38, Constitution Of India - Article 72(1); Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 125; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 149; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 302; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 34; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 84
Cases Referred:
Jagmohan Singh vs. The State of U.P. MANU/SC/0139/1972; Mangalore Ganesh Beedi Works and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0297/1974; Bishan Dass vs. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0096/1975; Ediga Anamma vs. State of Andhra Pradesh MANU/SC/0128/1974; Mrs. Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India (UOI) and Anr. MANU/SC/0133/1978; Narendra Kumar and Ors. vs. The Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0013/1959; E.P. Royappa vs. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. MANU/SC/0380/1973; Sridharan Motor Service vs. Industrial Tribunal and Ors. MANU/TN/0023/1958; Sunil Batra vs. Delhi Administration and Ors. etc. MANU/SC/0184/1978; Srirangan vs. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0138/1977; Nemu Ram Bora vs. The State of Assam and Nagaland MANU/SC/0179/1974; State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Lalla Singh and Ors. MANU/SC/0154/1977; Harnam vs. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0129/1975; Carlose John and Anr. vs. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0115/1974; Kartar Singh and Ors. vs. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0131/1976; Balwant Singh vs. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0331/1975; Ambaram vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh MANU/SC/0085/1976; Sarveshwar Prasad Sharma vs. State of Madhya Pradesh MANU/SC/0132/1977
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated September 12, 1974 of the Allahabad High Court in Criminal Appeal 501 of 1974, From the Judgment and Order dated January 9, 1978 of the Kerala High Court in Criminal Appeal 213 of 1977 Ref. Trial 3 of 1977 and From t1he J
Disposition:
In Favour of State
Authorities Referred:
Laws of England
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  20

Mentioned
  7

Case Note:
Criminal - Death sentence - Section 354 of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 - Appeal against award of death sentence - High Court awarded death sentence as there were special reasons within Section 354 (3) - In first appeal appellant had already undergone death sentence for offence of murder and after release within few days committed brutal murder of another person by chasing him over distance of over 250 feets and inflicted repeated knife blows till he died - In second appeal appellant murdered his uncle and his two sons - In third appeal appellant committed three murders over trivial incident - Thus in all three appeals murder were committed over trivial incidents and was inflicted with brutality - If the accused in such cases were not awarded death sentence they will become menace to society - Court to impose a proper punishment depending upon the degree of criminality and desirability to impose such punishment as a measure of social necessity and as a means of deterring other potential offenders - Failure to impose a death sentence in such grave cases where it is a crime against the society-particularly in cases of murders committed with extreme brutality will bring to nought the sentence of death provided by Section 302 - Held, no reason to set aside death sentence awarded to appellants - Appeal dismissed.
JUDGMENT
Authored By : V.R. Krishna Iyer, A.P. Sen
V.R. Krishna Iyer, J.
THE DEADLY QUANDARY
1. To be or not to be : that is the question of lethal import and legal moment, in each of these three appeals where leave is confined to the issue of the propriety of the impost of capital penalty against which the brutal culprits desperately beseech that their dear life be spared by the Summit Court and the incarceratory alternative be awarded instead. There is, as here, a judicial dimension to the quasi-Hamletian dilemma when "a murder most foul" demands of sentencing justice punitive infliction of death or the lesser punishment of life imprisonment, since the Penal Code leaves the critical choice between physical liquidation and life-long incarceration to the enlightened conscience and sensitized judgment of the Court.
2. A narration of facts is normally necessary at this early stage but we relegate it to a later part, assuming for the nonce the monstrosity of the murder in each case. Is mere shock at the horrendous killing sufficient alibi to extinguish one more life, de hors circumstances, individual and social, motivational and psychical? The crime and the criminal, contemporary societal crisis, opinions of builders and moulders of the nation, cultural winds of world change and other profound factors, spiritual and secular, and above all, constitutional, inarticulately guide the Court's faculty in reading the meaning of meanings in preference to a mechanistic interpretation of Section 302 I.P.C. projected in petrified print from Macaulay's vintage mint.
3. We banish the possible confusion about the precise issue before us-it is not the constitutionality of the provision for death penalty, but only the canalisation of the sentencing discretion in a competing situation. The former problem is now beyond forensic doubt after Jagmohan Singh v. State of Utter Pradesh MANU/SC/0139/1972 : 1973CriLJ370 and the latter is in critical need of tangible guidelines, at once constitutional and functional. The law reports reveal the impressionistic and unpredictable notes struck by some decisions and the occasional vocabulary of horror and terror, of extenuation and misericordia, used in the sentencing tail-piece of judgments. Therefore, this jurisprudential exploration, within the framework of Section 302 I.P.C, has become necessitous, both because the awesome 'either/or' of the Section spells out no specific indicators and law in this fatal area cannot afford to be conjectural. Guided missiles, with lethal potential, in unguided hands, even judicial, is a grave risk where the peril is mortal though tempered by the appellate process. The core question-the only question-that occupies our attention, Within the confines of the Code, is as to when and why shall capital sentence be pronounced on a murderer and why not in other cases.
4. The penological poignancy and urgency of the solution is obvious since the human stakes are high, and error, even judicial error silences for ever a living being and despatches him to that 'undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller returns' : nor, once executed, can 'storied urn or animated bust back to its mansion call the fleeting breath'. The macabre irrevocability of the extreme penalty makes the sombre issue before us too important to be relegated, as often happens, to a farewell paragraph, with focus on frightful features of the crime and less stress on the crime-doer and related factOrs. When human rights jurisprudence and constitutional protections have escalated to sublime levels in our country and heightened awareness of the gravity of dealth penalty is growing all over the civilised globe in our half-century, is it right to leave Section 302 I.P.C. in vague duality and value-free neutrality? Any academic who has monitored Indian sentencing precedents on murder may awaken to 'the overt ambivalence and covert conflict' among judges 'concerning continued resort to the death sentence' which, according to Prof. Blackshield,( Prof.A.R.Blackshild, Associate Professor of law, University of New South Wales: Capital Punishment in India: The impact of the Ediga Anamma Case-July1977)seems to minor the uncertainties and conflicts of values in the community itself. This tangled web of case-law has been woven around the terse terms of Section 302, I.P.C. during the last hundred years.
THE OLD TEXT AND THE NEW LIGHT
Section 302. Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
5. Such stark brevity leaves a deadly discretion but beams little legislative light on when the court shall hang the sentencee or why the lesser penalty shall be preferred. This facultative fluidity of the provision reposes a trust in the court to select. And 'discretionary navigation in an unchartered sea is a hazardous undertaking unless recognised and recognizable principles, rational and constitutional, are crystallised as 'interstitial legislation' by the highest court. The flame of life cannot flicker uncertain and so Section 302 I.P.C. must be invested with pragmatic concreteness that inhibits ad hominem responses of individual judges and is in penal conformance with constitutional norms and world conscience. Within the dichtomous frames-work of Section 302 I.P.C, upheld in Jagmohan Singh, we have to evolve working rules of punishment bearing the markings of enlightened flexibility and societal sensibility. Hazy law, where human life hangs in the balance, injects an agonising consciousness that judicial error may prove to be 'crime' beyond 'punishment'. And history bears testimony to reversal of Court verdict by Discovery of Time. The tragic speech in the Commons of former Home Secretary (Chuter Ede) makes ghastly reading :(The Crusade against Capital Punishment in Great Britain by Elizabeth Orman Tuttle,[1961],p.96)
I was the Home Secretary who wrote on Evans' papers. "The law must take its course." I never said, in 1948 that a mistake was impossible. I think Evans' case shows, in spite of all that has been done since, that a mistake was possible, and that, in the form in which the verdict was actually given on a particular case, a mistake was made. I hope that no future Home Secretary, while in office or after he has left office, will ever have to feel that although he did his best and no one could accuse him of being either careless or inefficient, he sent a man to the gallows who was not "guilty as charged.
That is why we devote a whole judgment to what ordinarily is a brief finale at the end of a long opinion.
6. In Ediga Annama v. State of Andhra Pradesh MANU/SC/0297/1974 : (1974)ILLJ367SC , this Court did set down some working formulae whereby a synthesis could be reached as between death sentence and life imprisonment. Notwithstanding the catalogue of grounds warranting death sentence as an exceptional measure, 'life' being the rule, the judicial decisions have been differing (and dithering) at various levels, with the result the need for a thorough re-examination has been forced on us by counsel on both sides. Prof. Blackshield makes an acid comment:(Prof. A.R.Blackshield, Associate Professor of Law, University of New South Law, University Punishment in India. The Impact of Ediga Annamma Case-July 1977.)
The fact is that decisions since Ediga Anamma have displayed the same pattern of confusion, contradictions and aberrations as decisions before that case.... To test this, I have abstracted from the All India Reporter seventy cases in which the Supreme Court has had to choose between life and death under Section 302: the last twenty-five reported cases before the date of Ediga Anamma, and the next forty-five (including, of course, Ediga Anamma itself) on or after that date.
But where life and death are at stake, inconsistencies which are understandable may not be acceptable. The hard evidence of the accompanying "kit of cases" compels the conclusion that, at least in contemporary India, Mr. Justice Douglas' argument in Furman v. Georgia 408 U.S. at 238 is correct: that arbitrariness and uneven incidence are inherent and inevitable in a system of capital punishment; and that therefore-in Indian constitutional terms, and in spite of Jagmohan Singh-the retention of such a system necessarily violates Article 14 guarantee of "equality before the law.
7. The author further observes:
One source of the confusion seems to have been an under-current of disagreement as to the correctness and applicability of the argument in Ediga Anamma. But the only direct challenge has been in Bishan Dass v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0096/1975 : 1975CriLJ461 (January 10, 1975 : Case 52) and, with respect, the challenge there seems clearly misconceived.
What a study of the decisions of the higher courts on the life-or-death choice shows is that judicial impressionism still shows up and it is none too late to enunciate a systematised set of criteria or at least reliable beacons Ediga Annamma (supra) in terms, attempted this systematisation:
Let us crystallise the positive indicators against death sentences under Indian Law currently. Where the murderer is too young or too old, the clemency of penal justice helps him. Where the offender suffers from socio-economic, psychic or penal compulsions insufficient to attract a legal exception or to down-grade the crime into a lesser one. judicial commutation is permissible. Other general social pressures, warranting judicial notice, with an extenuating impact may in special cases, induce the lesser penalty. Extraordinary features in the judicial process, such as that the death sentence has hung over the head of the culprit excruciatingly long, may persuade the Court to be compassionate. Likewise, if others involved in the crime and similarly situated have received the benefit of life imprisonment or if the offence is only constructive (i.e. combining the "murder" provision with the "unlawful assembly" provision),...or again (if) the accused has acted suddenly under another's instigation, without premeditation, perhaps the court may humanely opt for life, even life where a just cause or real suspicion of wifely infidelity pushed the criminal into the crime. On the other hand, the weapons used and the manner of their use the horrendous features of the crime and hapless, helpless state of the victim, and the like, steel the heart of the law for a sterner sentence. We cannot obviously feed into a judicial computer all such situations since they are astrological imponderables in an imperfect and undulating society. A legal policy on life or death cannot be left for ad-hoc mood or individual predilection and so we have sought to objectify to the extent possible, abandoning retributive ruthlessness, amending the deterrent creed and accepting the trend against the extreme and irrevocable penalty of putting out life. Ediga Annamma v. State of A.P. MANU/SC/0128/1974 : 1974CriLJ683 .
8. From what we have said and quoted and from the persistence of forensic divarication, it has now become necessary to have a second look at the life versus death question, not for summarising hitherto decided cases and distilling the common factors but for applying the Constitution to cut the Gordian knot. The suprema lex must set the perspective and illumine the meaning of subordinate statutes especially where some provisions contain obfuscatory elements, for, our founding fathers have not hammered out a merely pedantic legal text but handed down a constellation of human values, cherished principles and spiritual norms which belight old codes and imperial laws and impel new interpretations and legislations to tune up the New Order. The Indian Penal Code must be sensitized by the healing touch of the Preamble and Part III. Wrote Wheeler, J : Dwy v. Connecticut Co., 89 Conn. 74.
That court best serves the law which recognises that the rules of law which grew up in a remote generation may, in the fullness of experience, be found to serve another generation badly, and which discards the old rule when it finds that another rule of law represents what should be according to the established and settled judgment of society....
Benjamin N. Cardozo, said :(The Nature of the Judicial Process by Benjamin N.Cardozo)
If judges have woefully misinterpreted the mores of their day, or if the mores of their day are no longer those of ours, they ought not to tie, in helpless submission, the hands of their successOrs.
9. Such a solution to the death/life alternatives, where the Code leaves the Judge in the cold, has its limits. "Justice Homes put his view pithily when he said that judges make law interstitially, that they are confined from molar to molecular motion. Justice Frankfurter puts it more colloquially, saying that judges make law at retail, legislators at wholesale." Therefore, it is no heresy to imbibe and inject the social philosophy of the Constitution into the Penal Code to resolve the tension between the Past and the Present.
QUO VADIS DISCRETIONARY DEATH SENTENCE?
10. Indian Justice and the constitutional order are centuries ahead of the barbarities of Judge Jeffreys of 'Bloody Assizes' fame; and ideologically away from the years of imperial butchery of Indian uprising when the Penal Code was drafted. Since Law reflects Life, new meanings must permeate the Penal Code. The deprivation of life under our system is too fundamental to be permitted save on the gravest ground and under the strictest scrutiny if Justice, Dignity, Fair Procedure and Freedom are creedally constitutional. So it is that in this bunch of appeals the court is called upon by counsel for the appellants to repel sentence by hunch and to lay down broad norms and essential principles as beacon lights which make the law of murder, in the sentencing sector, most restrictive and least vagarious.
11. More illumination and closer examination of the provisions viz. Section 302 in the larger humanist context and constitutional conspectus, is necessitous. Legal justice must be made of surer stuff where deprivation of life may be the consequence. So we have heard a wider range of submissions and sought the 'amicus' services of the learned Solicitor General. An intervener (Committee for Abolition of Death Penalty), interested in abolition of death penalty has submitted, through Dr. L.M. Singhvi, some material. We record our appreciation of the assistance given by the former and take due note of the views presented by the latter. Light, not heat, is welcome from any source in aid of judicial justice.
12. We are cognizant of the fact that no inflexible formula is feasible which will provide a complete set of criteria for the infinite variety of circumstances that may affect the gravity of the crime of murder, as pointed out by Palekar, J. in Jagmohan Singh (supra). The learned Judge further observed:
The impossibility of laying down standards is at the very core of the criminal law as administered in India which invests the judges with a very wide discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment. The discretion in the matter of sentence is, as already pointed out, liable to be corrected by superior courts. (p. 35)
13. What is important to remember is that while rigid prescriptions and random prescriptions which imprison judicial discretion may play tricks with justice, the absence, altogether, of any defined principles except a variorum of rulings may stultify sentencing law and denude it of decisional precision. 'Well-recognised principles' is an elegant phrase. But what are they, when minds differ even on the basics?
14. Fluctuating facts and keleidoscopic circumstances, bewildering novelties and unexpected factors, personal vicissitudes and societal variables may defy standard-setting for all situations; but that does not mean that humane principles should be abandoned and blanket discretion endowed, making life and liberty the plaything of the mentality of human judges. Benjamin Cardozo has pricked the bubble of illusion about the utter objectivity of the judicial process:(The Nature of the Judicial Process by Benjamin N.Cardozop.167)
I have spoken of the forces of which judges avowedly avail to shape the form and content of their judgments. Even these forces are seldom fully in consciousness. They lie so near the surface, however, that their existence and influence are not likely to be disclaimed.... Deep below consciousness are other forces, the likes and the dislikes, the predilections and the prejudices, the complex of instincts and emotions and habits and convictions, which make the man, whether he be litigant or judge.
Section 302 is silent; so the judges have to speak, because the courts must daily sentence. Merely to say that discretion is guided by well-recognised principles shifts the issue to what those recognised rules are. Are they the same as were exercised judicially when Bhagat Singh was swung into physical oblivion? No. The task is to translate in new terms the currently consecrated principles, informed by tradition, methodized by analogy, disciplined by system, and subordinated to 'the primordial necessity of order in social life'. The error of parallax which dated thought processes, through dusty precedents, may project needs to be corrected. That is the essay we undertake here.
15. Moreover, the need for well-recognised principles to govern the 'deadly' discretion is so interlaced with fair procedure that unregulated power may even militate against Article 21 as expounded in Maneka Gandhi's case Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India MANU/SC/0133/1978 : [1978]2SCR621 an aspect into which we do not enter here. Judicial absolutism or ad-hocism is anathema in our constitutional scheme. It has been said that 'a judge untethered by a text is a dangerous instrument'; and we may well add, judge-power, uncanalised by clear principles may be equally dangerous when the consequence of his marginal indiscretion may be horrific hanging of a human being until he be dead. Palekar, J. himself accepted that "well-recognised principles" must govern sentencing discretion.
16. The precise criteria which constitute, and the normative nature of those principles did not directly fall for decision as that case proceeded on the basis that the lower courts had rightly exercised the sentencing discretion. The precise and only issue that was mooted and decided in Jagmohan Singh (The Supreme Court of India-A Socio Legal Critique of its Juristic Techniques by Rajeev Dhavan-Foreword by Lord Denning,M. was the constitutionality of Section 302 I.P.C. and the holding was that 'the death sentence imposed after trial in accordance with procedure established by law is not unconstitutional'. The acceptance of the invulnerability of discretionary power does not end the journey; it inaugurates the search for those, 'well recognised principles' Palekar, J., speaks of in the Jagmohan case. Incidental observations without concentration on the sentencing criteria are not the ratio of the decision. Judgments are not Bible for every line to be venerated.
17. When the legislative text is too bald to be self-acting or suffers zigzag distortion in action, the primary obligation is on Parliament to enact necessary clauses by appropriate amendments to Section 302 I.P.C. But if legislative undertaking is not in sight judges who have to implement the Code cannot fold up their professional hands but must make the provision viable by evolution of supplementary principles even if it may appear to possess the flavour of law-making. Lord Dennings' observations are apposite:
Many of the Judges of England have said that they do not make law. They only interpret it. This is an illusion which they have fostered. But it is a notion which is now being discarded everywhere. Every new decision-on every new situation-is a development of the law. Law does not stand still. It moves continually. Once this is recognised, then the task of the Judge is put on a higher plane. He must consciously seek to mould the law so as to serve the needs of the time. He must not be a mere mechanic, a mere working mason, laying brick on brick, without thought to the overall design. He must be an architect-thinking of the structure as a whole, building for society a system of law which is strong, durable and just. It is on his work that civilised society itself depends.
18. The Court's tryst with the Constitution obligates it to lay down general rules, not a complete directory, which will lend predictability to the law vis-a-vis the community and guide the judiciary in such a grim verdict as choice between life and death. The right to life, in our constitutional order, is too sacred to be wished away without so much as Directive Principles for its deprivation, save sweeping judicial discretion and reference for confirmation or appellate review the know-how for exercise of either being left to the assumed infallibility of the curial process in the face of the daily reality that there are extreme variations among judges themselves on 'when' and 'why' the extreme penalty shall or shall not be inflicted.
19. Currently, the welter of the British Indian and post-Independence decisions and the impact of laconic legislative changes in the Criminal Procedure Code the competition among the retributive, deterrent, the reformative and even the existentialist theories of punishment and of statistical studies and sociological and cultural winds settle the lethal fate of the living man in the cage.
20. Law must be honest to itself. Is it not true that some judges count the number of fatal wounds, some the nature of the weapons used, others count the corpses or the degree of horror and yet others look into the age or sex of the offender and even the lapse of time between the trial court's award of death sentence and the final disposal of the appeal? With some judges, motives, provocations, primary or constructive guilt, mental disturbance and old feuds, the savagery of the murderous moment or the plan which has preceded the killing, the social milieu, the sublimated class complex and other odd factors enter the sentencing calculus. Stranger still, a good sentence of death by the trial court is sometimes upset by the Supreme Court because of Law's delays. Courts have been directed execution of murderers who are mental cases, who do not fall within the McNaghten rules, because of the insane fury of the slaughter. A big margin of subjectivism, a preference for old English precedents, theories of modern penology, behavioral emphasis or social antecedents, judicial hubris or human rights perspectives, criminological literacy or fanatical reverence for outworn social philosophers buried in the debris of time except as part of history-this plurality of forces plays a part in swinging the pendulum of sentencing justice erratically. Therefore, until Parliament speaks, the court cannot be silent. (Hopefully, Section 302 I.P.C. is being amended, at long last, but it is only half-way through as the Rajya Sabha proceedings show. We will revert to it later).
21. Prof. Blackshield, on an analytical study of Indian death sentence decisions, has remarked with unconventional candour:
But where life and death are at stake, inconsistencies which are understandable may not be acceptable.
22. His further comments are noteworthy:
The fact-is that in most cases where the sentence of death under Section 302 is confirmed by the Supreme Court, there is little or no discussion of the reasons for confirmation. Sometimes there is a brief assertion of "no extenuating circumstances" (which means to imply that the Court is making its own discretionary judgment; at other times there is a brief assertion of "no ground to interfere" (which seems to imply that the Court is merely reviewing the legitimacy of the High Court's choice of sentence). The result is to obfuscate, probably beyond any hope of rationalisation, the analytical issues involved. (supra)
The twists and turns in sentencing pattern and the under-emphasis on the sentencee's circumstances in decided cases make an in-depth investigation of the 'principles' justifying the award of death sentence a constitutional duty of conscience. This Court must extricate, until Parliament legislates, the death sentence sector from judicial subjectivism and consequent uncertainty. As. Justice Cardozo, in The Nature of the Judicial Process, bluntly states : pp. 167 - 168
There has been a certain lack of candor in much of the discussion of the theme, or rather perhaps in the refusal to discuss it, as if judges must lose respect and confidence by the reminder that they are subject to human limitations...if there is anything of reality in my analysis of the judicial process, they do not stand aloof on these chills and distant heights; and we shall not help the cause of truth by acting and speaking as if they do. The great tides and currents which engulf the rest of men do not turn aside in their course and pass the judges by.
23. It is fair to mention that the humanistic imperatives of the Indian Constitution, as paramount to the punitive strategy of the Penal Code, have hardly been explored by courts in this field of 'life or death' at the hands of the law. The main focus of our judgment is on this poignant gap in 'human rights jurisprudence' within the limits of the Penal Code, impregnated by the Constitution. To put it pithily, a world order voicing the worth of the human person, a cultural legacy charged with compassion, an interpretative liberation from colonial callousness to life and liberty, a concern for social justice as setting the sights of individual justice, interact with the inherited text of the Penal Code to yield the goals desiderated by the Preamble and Articles 14, 19 and 21.
24. Nor can courts be complacent in the thought that even if they err the clemency power will and does operate to save many a life condemned by the highest court to death. For one thing, the uneven politics of executive clemency is not an unreality when we remember it is often the violent dissenters, patriotic terrorists, desperadoes nurtured by the sub-culture of poverty and neurotics hardened by social neglect, and not the members of the Establishment or conformist class, who get executed through judicial and clemency processes. Executive commutation is no substitute for judicial justice; at best it is administrative policy and at worst pressure-based partiality. In either case, that court self-condemns itself which awards death penalty with a sop to its conscience that the habitual clemency of Government will soften the judicial excess in sentence. If justice under the law justifies the lesser sentence it is abdication of judicial power to inflict the extreme penalty and extraneous to seek consolation in the possible benign interference by the President. The criteria for clemency are often different. We are thus left with the necessity to decipher sentencing discretion in the death/life situation.
SENTENCING CYNOSURES
25. Having stated the area and object of investigation we address ourselves to this grave penological issue purely as judges deciding a legal problem, putting aside views, philosophical or criminological, one holds. But law, in this area, cannot go it alone; and cross-fertilisation from sociology, history, cultural anthropology and current national perils and developmental goals and above all, constitutional currents, cannot be eschewed.
26. Let us leave 'law' a while and begin with drawing the backdrop with a lurid brush. Every sombre dawn a human being is hanged by the legal process, the flag of humane justice shall be hung half-mast. Such is the symbolic reverence the land of Gandhi should pay to human life haltered up by lethal law. The values of a nation and ethos of a generation mould concepts of crime and punishment. So viewed, the lode-star of penal policy to-day, shining through the finer culture of former centuries, strengthens the plea against death penalty. Moreover, however much judicially screened and constitutionally legitimated, there is a factor of fallibility, a pall that falls beyond recall and a core of sublimated cruelty implied in every death penalty. This is the starting point of our re-appraisal of presidential and legislative texts, with a view to evolving clearer criteria for choice between the Life-Death Alternatives enacted into the Penal Code. We may, for emphasis, recall Section 302 I.P.C.,-at once laconic and draconic, which reads:
Section 302. Punishment for murder.-Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
We approach the resolution of the punishment predicament in a manner at once legal, logical and criminological and impregnated with values constitutional. Therefore, we will first study the significant legislative developments in the two interacting Codes and related parliamentary essays at change. Where broad conclusions emerge horn such an investigation, constitutional reinforcement may be sought. Since the Constitution is paramount and paramountcy is paramountcy, its expansive humanism must overpower traditional 'terrorism' in the practice of sentencing. When this stage is reached and formulation of guidelines made, we will consider the criminological foundations of theories of punishment which harmonise with the human rights jurisprudence of our cultural cosmos. Finally, we will set down the salient cynosures for judges in their day-to-day labours.
27. One sentencing aspect which has found prominent place in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, but more often ignorantly ignored, needs to be highlighted for future guidance. The cases actually demanding decision, their factual matrices and the actual application of the principles we have formulated to the appeals under consideration are the decisive part of the judgment.
28. The sister Codes-the Indian Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code are interwoven into the texture of sentencing. So much so, the various' changes in Section 367 of the Procedure Code, 1898 and its re-incarnation in Section 354 of the Code of 1973 impact on the interpretation of Section 302 of the Penal Code. The art of statutory construction seeks aid from connective tissues, as it were, of complementary enactments. This mode offers a penological synthesis Parliament legislatively intended. From this angle, we may examine the history of the amendments to the Procedure Code in so far as they mould the sentencing discretion vested by Section 302 I.P.C.
29. Vintage words adapt their semantic content with change in Society's thoughtways and people's mores. Linkwise, Law-Life mutuality moulds judicial construction. So when a nineteenth century Code, with vital impact an life and liberty, falls for examination in the last quarter of the twentieth century, criminological developments finds their way into the process of statutory decoding. This is obviously permissible, even necessary. A progressive construction which up-dates the sense of statutory language has been adopted in Weems v. United States 217 U.S. 349 and commended by jurists.
30. We may ask ourselves whether the Procedure Code, which intertwines with the Penal Code lends discretionary direction? Similarly, a brief survey of the trend of legislative endeavours may also serve to indicate whether the people's consciousness has been projected towards narrowing or widening the scope for infliction of death penalty. Current criminological theories, the march of the abolitionist movement across the continents, the national heritage and voice of the makers of modern India and parliamentary re-thinking on reform of the Penal Code may also be indicatOrs. In this setting, let us rationalize and humanize the discretionary exercise under Section 302 I.P.C.
31. Several attempts have been made to restrict or remove death penalty under Section 302 but never even once to enlarge its application. Parliamentary pressure has been to cut down death penalty, although the section formally remains the same and is very nearly being wholly recast benignly. The cue for the Court is clear.
32. In 1931, an abolition bill was introduced in the Legislative Assembly by Gaya Prasad Singh; but a motion for circulation of the bill was defeated after it was opposed by the government.
32. The pattern after independence has been much the same. In 1956, n. bill introduced in the Lok Sabha by Mukund Lal Agarwal was rejected after government opposition. In 1958 a Resolution for abolition, moved in the Rajya Sabha by Prithvi Raj Kapur, was withdrawn after debate. (Its purpose had been served, said Shri Kapur). 'The ripples are created and it is in the air": Rajya Sabha Debates, April 25, 1958, Cols. 444-528. In 1961 a further Resolution, moved in the Rajya Sabha by Mrs. Savitry Devi Nigam, was negatived after debate.
34. In 1962, however Resolution moved in the Lok Sabha by Raghu-nath Singh received more serious attention : Lok Sabha Debates, April 21, 1962, Cols. 307. The Resolution was withdrawn, but only after the government had given an undertaking that a transcript of the debate would be forwarded to the Law Commission, for consideration in the context of its review of the Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code. The result was a separate Law Commission Report on Capital Punishment, submitted to the government in September, 1967. (supra)
35. At pages 354-55, the Law Commission summarized its main conclusions as follows:
It is difficult to rule out that the validity of or the strength behind, many of the arguments for abolition. Nor does the commission treat lightly the argument based on the irrevocability of the sentence of death, the need for a modern approach, the severity of capital punishment, and the strong feeling shown by certain sections of public opinion in stressing deeper questions of human values.
36. Having regard, however, to the conditions in India, to the variety of the social upbringing of its inhabitants, to the disparity in the level of morality and education in the country, to the vastness of its area, to the diversity of its population and to the paramount need for maintaining law and order in the country at the present juncture, India cannot risk the experiment of abolition of capital punishment.
37. Currently, there is a Bill introduced in the Lok Sabha for total abolition. The most meaningful contribution to 'human rights legality' in the 'terminal' territory of punitivity is the parliamentary amendment to Section 302 I.P.C. half-way through and, if we may say so with respect, half-fulfilling both the humanist quintessence of the Constitution and, may be, the creed of the Father of the Nation. Gandhiji long ago wrote in the Harijan:
God Alone Can Take Life Because He Alone Gives it.
38. We will dwell on this Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1972 passed by the Rajya Sabha in 1978, later in this Judgment but mention this seminal event as a kindly portent against the 'homicidal' exercise of discretion, often an obsession with retributive justice in disguise. And the parliamentary prospects, to the extent relevant to judicial discretion disappoint those who are restless if murder is divorced from death penalty. The Future shapes the Present on occasions and therefore we take note of this big change in the offing. Section 302, as now recast by the Rajya Sabha, reads:
302.(1) Whoever commits murder shall, save as otherwise provided in Sub-section (2), be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever commits murder shall,-
(a) if the murder has been committed after previous planning and involves extreme brutality; or
(b) if the murder involves exceptional depravity; or
(c) if the murder is of a member of any of the armed forces of the Union or of a member of any police force or of any public servant and was committed-
(i) while such member or public servant was on duty; or
(ii) in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such member of public servant in the lawful discharge of his duty as such member or public servant whether at the time of murder he was such member or public servant as the case may be, or had ceased to be such member or public servant; or
(d) if the murder is of a person who had acted in the lawful discharge of this duty under Section 43 of the CrPC, 1973, or who had rendered assistance to a Magistrate or a police officer demanding his aid or requiring his assistance under Section 37 or section 129 of the said Code; or
(e) if the murder has been committed by him, while under sentence of imprisonment for life, and such sentence has become final,
be punished with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where a person while undergoing sentence of imprisonment for life is sentenced to imprisonment for an offence under Clause (e) of Sub-section (2) such sentence shall run consecutively and not concurrently.(Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1972 as passed by Rajya Sabha)
39. Maybe, the fuller and finer flow of the constitutional stream of human dignity and social justice will shape the provision more reformatively. Suffice it to say that the battle against death penalty by parliamentary action is gaining ground and those who do live in the ivory tower-and Judges, hopefully, do not-will take cognizance of this compassionate trend.
40. The inchoate indicators gatherable from the direct reforms of death penalty take us to the next 'neon sign' from the changes in the Procedure Code. Section 302 I.P.C., permits death penalty but Section 354(3) of the Procedure Code, 1973 processes the discretionary power. The central issue of death/life discretion is not left naked by the Procedure Code which, by necessary implication, has clothed it with pro-life language. The legislative development, through several successive amendments, has shifted the punitive center of gravity from life-taking to life sentence. To start with, Section 367(5) obligated the court to 'state the reason why sentence of death was not passed'. In other words, the discretion was directed positively towards death penalty. The next stage was the deletion of this part of the provision leaving the judicial option open. And then came the new humanitarian Sub-section [Section 354(3)] of the Code of 1973, whereby the dignity and worth of the human person, under-scored in the Constitution, shaped the penal policy related to murder. The Sub-section provides:
When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or, in the alternative, with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the case of sentence of death, the special reasons for such sentence.
(emphasis added)
41. Thus, on the statutory side, there has been a significant shift since India became free. In practice, the effect of the pre-1955 version is that while the former rule was to sentence to death a person convicted for murder and to impose the lesser sentence for reasons to be recorded in writing, the process has suffered a reversal now. Formerly, capital punishment was to be imposed unless special reasons could be found to justify the lesser sentence. The 1955 amendment, removing the requirement, had left the courts equally free to award either sentence. Finally, with the new 1973 provision-
a great change has overtaken the law.... The unmistakable shift in legislative emphasis is that life imprisonment for murder is the rule and capital sentence the exception to be resorted to for reasons to be stated.... It is obvious that the disturbed conscience of the State on the vexed question of legal threat to life by way of death sentence has sought to express itself legislatively, the stream of tendency being towards cautious, partial abolition and a retreat from total retention.
42. The twin survey of attempted and half accomplished changes in the Penal Code and the statutory mutation, pregnant with significance, wrought into the procedure Code, definitely drives judicial discretion to a benign destination. The message of the many legislative exercises is that murder will ordinarily be visited only with life imprisonment and it is imperative that death sentence shall not be directed unless there exist "special reasons for such sentence."
43. The era of broad discretion when Jagmohan's case was decided has ended and a chapter of restricted discretion has since been inaugurated. This is a direct response, not merely to the humane call of the Constitution, but also to the wider cultural and criminological transformation of opinion on the futility of the law of 'Life for Life' 'red in tooth and claw'. No longer did judicial discretion depend on vague 'principles'. It became accountable to the strict requirements of Section 354(3) of the 1973 Code.
44. By way of aside, we may note that the consolation that judicial discretion in action is geared to justice is not always true to life.
The discretion of a judge is said by Lord Camden to be the law of tyrants: it is always unkonwn; it is different in different men; it is casual, and depends upon constitution, temper and passion. In the best, it is of ten times caprice; in the worst, it is. every vice, folly and passion to which human nature is liable.... " 1 Bouv. Law Dict., Rawles' Third Revision, p. 885."("Judicial Discretion"National College of the State Judiciary University of Nevada,Reno ,Nevada,[1974],p.14)
"An appeal to a judge's discretion is an appeal to his judicial conscience. The discretion must be exercised, not in opposition to, but in accordance with, established principles of law." (Griffin v. State, 12 Ga. App. 615) " Ibid p. 33.
45. Here is thus an appeal to the informed conscience of the sentencing judge not to award death penalty save for special reasons which) have direct nexus with the necessity for hanging the murderer by law.
46. The revolutionary import of the target expression, in a death sentence situation, viz., 'the special reasons for such sentence' demands perceptive exploration without emotional explosion or sadistic sublimation disguised as 'special reason'. Here we enter the penological area of lethal justice, social defence and purpose-oriented punishment.
47. Before launching on the decisive discussion it is fair to be frank on one facet of the judicial process. To quote Richard B. Brandt:"Judicial Discretion" National College of the State Judiciary University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada, 1974, 'p. 14("Social Justice"Ed.by Richard B.Brandt,pp.110-111)
Much of law is designed to avoid the necessity for the judge to reach what Holmes called his 'can't helps', his ultimate convictions or values. The force of precedent, the close applicability of statute law, the separation of powers, legal presumptions, statutes of limitations, rules of pleading and evidence, and above all the pragmatic assessments of fact that point to one result whichever ultimate values be assumed, all enable the judge in most cases to; stop short of a resort to his personal standards. When these prove unavailing, as is more likely in the case of courts of last resort at the frontiers of the law, and most likely in a, supreme constitutional court, the judge necessarily resorts to his own scheme of values. It may, therefore, be said that the most important thing about a judge is his philosophy; and if it be dangerous for him to have one, it is at all events less dangerous than the self-deception of having none.
THE CODES, THE Constitution AND THE CULTURAL
BACKDROP
48. Primarily we seek guidelines from the two Codes, in the omnipresence and omnipotence of the over-arching Constitution. The Indian cultural current also counts and so does our spiritual chemistry, based on divinity in everyone, catalysed by the Buddha-Gandhi compassion. 'Every saint has a past and every sinner a future'-strikes a note of reformatory potential even in the most ghastly crime. This axiom is a vote against 'death' and hope in 'life'.
49. Many humane movements and sublime souls have cultured the higher consciousness of mankind, chased death penalty out of half the globe and changed world view on its morality. We will, in the culminating part of our, judgment, cull great opinions to substantiate this assertion but content here with pointing to their relevance as part of the conspectus,
50. Criminologists have elaborately argued that 'death' has decisively lost the battle as the dominant paradigm and even in our Codes has shrunk into a weak exception. Even so, what are these exceptional cases? Not hunch or happen-stance but compelling grounds, lest the" 'Chancellor's foot' syndrome reappear in different form. So let us examine the grounds in this new sheen.
51. An easy confusion is over-stress on the horror of the crime and the temporary terror verging on insane violence the perpetrator displays, to the exclusion of a host of other weighty factors when the scales are to settle in favour of killing by law the killer who resorts to unlaw.
52. Speaking illustratively is shocking crime, without more, good to justify the lethal verdict? Most murders are horrifying, and an adjective adds but sentiment, not argument. The personal story of an actor in a shocking murder, if considered, may bring tears and soften the sentence. He might have been a tortured child* an ill-treated orphan, a jobless starveling, a badgered brother, wounded son, a tragic person hardened by societal cruelty or vengeful justice, even a Hamlet or Parasurama. He might have been angelic boy but thrown into mafia company or inducted into dopes and drugs by parental neglect or morally-mentally retarded or disordered. Imagine a harijan village backed out of existence by the genocidal fury of a kulak group and one survivor, days later, cutting to pieces the villain of the earlier outrage. Is the court in error in reckoning the prior provocative barbarity as a sentencing factor?
53. Another facet. Maybe, the convict's poverty had disabled his presentation of the social milieu or other circumstances of extenuation in defence. Judges may be of moods, soft or severe; their weaknesses may be sublimated prejudices; their sympathies may be personal hyper-sensitivity. Did not Lord Camden, one of the greatest and purest of English judges, say
that the discretion of a judge is the law of tyrants; it is always unknown; it is different in different men; it is casual, and depends upon constitution, temper and passion. In the best it is oftentimes caprice; in the worst, it is every vice, folly and passion to which human nature can be liable." (State v. Cummings 36 Mo.263 ? "Judicial Discretion" (supra) p. 34.
54. When life is at stake, can such frolics of fortune play with judicial verdicts?
55. The nature of the crime-too terrible to contemplate-has often been regarded a traditional peg on which to hang a death penalty. Even Ediga Annamma (supra) has hardened here. But 'murder most foul' is not the test, speaking scientifically. The doer may be a patriot, a revolutionary, a weak victim of an overpowering passion who, given better environment, may be a good citizen, a good administrator, a good husband, a great saint. What was Valmiki once? And that sublime spiritual star, Shri Aurobindo, tried once for murder but by history's fortune acquitted.
56. If we go only by the nature of the crime we get derailed by subjective paroxysm. 'Special reasons' must vindicate the sentence and so must be related to why the murderer must be hanged and why life imprisonment will not suffice. Decided cases have not adequately identified the manifold components of comprehensive sentencing. Resultantly, what is regarded as decisive is only relevant and what is equally telling remains untold. For reasons of 'special' grimness may be cancelled by juvenile justice. Brutality of the crime may be mollified at the level of sentencing justice by background of despair. Even a planned barbarity may be induced by an excessive obsession by one who could be a good person under other surroundings. Why, the ghastly crime may in rare cases be due to a brain tumour. Myriad factors of varying validity may affect the death penalty either way. The criminal will be projected on the scene and examined from different angles since the punishment is on the person, though for the offence.
CAPITAL PENALTY AND THE CONSTITUTION
57. In these pathless woods we must seek light from the Constitution regarding 'special reasons'. After all, no Code can rise higher than the Constitution and the Penal Code can survive only if it pays homage to the suprema lex. The only correct approach is to read into Section 302 I.P.C. and Section 354(3) Cr.P.C, the human rights and humane trends in the Constitution. So examined, the right to life and to fundamental freedoms is deprived when he is hanged to death, his dignity is defiled when his neck is noosed and strangled. What does Section 302 do by death penalty to the sentencee? It finally deprives him of his fundamental rights. True, fundamental rights are not absolute and may be restricted reasonably, even prohibited totally, if social defence compels such a step. Restriction may expand into extinction in extreme situations, (see Narendra Kumar) MANU/SC/0013/1959 : [1960]2SCR375 .
58. Punishment by deprivation of life or liberty must be validated by Articles 21, 14 and 19 the first guarantees fair procedure, the second is based on reasonableness of the deprivation of freedom to live and exercise the seven liberties and the last is an assurance of non-arbitrary and civilized punitive treatment. But in the connotation of these and other Articles of Part III, the social justice promise of Part IV and the primordial proposition of human dignity set high in the Preamble must play upon the meaning.
59. Crime and penal policy have to obey the behests set out above and we may gain constitutional light on the choice of 'life' or 'death' as appropriate punishment. Article 14 surely ensures that principled sentences of death, not arbitrary or indignant capital penalty, shall be imposed. Equal protection emanates from equal principles in exercise of discretion. In other words, the constraint of consistency and the mandate against unreasoning disregard of material circumstances are implicit lest discretion attracts the acrid epigram of judicial caprice.
60. The dignity of the individual shall not be desecrated toy infliction of atrocious death sentence merely because there is a murder proved although crying circumstances demand the lesser penalty. To exemplify, supposing a boy of fifteen incited by his elder brothers, chases with them a murderer of their father and after hours of search confronts the villain and vivisects him in blood-thirsty bestiality. Do you hang the boy, blind to his dignity and tenderness intertwined?
61. We mean to illustrate the applicability, not to exhaust the variables. Even here we may make it clear that equality is not to be confounded with flat uniformity.
The element of flexibility and choice in the process of adjudicating is precisely what justice requires in many cases. Flexibility permits more compassionate and more sensitive responses to differences which ought to count in applying legal norms, but which get buried in the gross and rounded-off language of rules that are directed at wholesale problems instead of particular disputes. Discretion in this sense allows the individualization of law and permits justice at times to be hand-made instead of mass-produced.
62. In urging that discretion is the "effective individualizing agent of the law". Dean Pound pointed out that
In proceedings for custody of children, where compelling consideration(s) cannot be reduced to rules...determination must be left, to no small extent, to the disciplined but personal feeling of the judge for what justice demands." 22 L.R. 635 Judicial Discretion, pp. 36-37.
63. Every variability is not arbitrary. On the contrary, it promotes rationality and humanity. Article 19 is a lighthouse with seven lamps of liberty throwing luminous indications of when and when only the basic freedoms enshrined therein can be utterly extinguished. The Judge who sits to decide between death penalty and life sentence must ask himself: Is it 'reasonably' necessary to extinguish his freedom of speech, of assembly and association, of free movement, by putting out finally the very flame of life? It is constitutionally permissible to swing a criminal out of corporeal existence only if the security of State and society, public order and the interests of the general public compel that course as provided in Article 19(2) to (6). They are the special reasons which; Section 354(3) speaks of. Reasonableness as envisaged in Article 19 has a relative connotation dependent on a variety of variables-cultural, social, economic and otherwise. We may give concrete instances at a later stage of this judgment but feel it necessary to state here that what is reasonable at a given time or in a given country or in a situation of crisis may not be the same as on other occasions or in other cultural climates. Indeed, that is the unspoken but inescapable silent command of our constitutional system.
64. So, we search for guidelines within Section 302 I.P.C. read with Section 354 Cr.P.C., and find that ordinarily, for murder a life-term is appropriate save where 'special reasons' are found for resort to total extinction of the right to life and farewell to fundamental rights. Public order and social security must demand it. That is to say, the sacrifice of a life is sanctioned only if otherwise public interest, social defence and public order would be smashed irretrievably. Social justice is rooted in spiritual justice and regards individual dignity and human divinity with sensitivity. So, such extra-ordinary grounds alone constitutionally qualify as 'special reasons' as leave no option to the court but to execute the offender if State and society are to survive. One stroke of murder hardly qualifies for this drastic requirement, however gruesome the killing or pathetic the situation, unless the inherent testimony oozing from that act is irresistible that the murderous appetite of the convict is too chronic and deadly that ordered life in a given locality or society or in prison itself would be gone if this man were now or later to be at large. If he is an irredeemable murderer, like a bloodthirsty tiger, he has to quit his terrestrial tenancy. Exceptional circumstances, beyond easy visualisation, are needed to fill this bill.
65. To repeat for emphasis, death-corporeal death-is adieu to fundamental rights. Restrictions on fundamental rights are permissible if they are reasonable. Such restriction may reach the extreme state of extinction only if it is so compellingly reasonable to prohibit totally. While sentencing, you cannot be arbitrary since what is arbitrary is per se unequal.
66. As stated earlier you cannot be unusually cruel for that spells arbitrariness and violates Article 14. Douglas, J. made this point clear : Furman v. Georgia 408 U.S. 238 .
There is increasing recognition of the fact that the basic theme of equal protection is implicit in "cruel and unusual" punishments. "A penalty...should be considered 'unusually' imposed if it is administered arbitrarily or discriminatorily.
"They are pregnant with discrimination; and discrimination is an ingredient not compatible with the idea of equal protection of the laws that is implicit in the ban on "cruel and unusual" punishments.
67. In Maneka Gandhi, this Court wrote : Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India MANU/SC/0133/1978 : [1978]2SCR621 .
We must reiterate here what was pointed out by the majority in E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0380/1973 : (1974)ILLJ172SC namely that "from a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule of law in a republic, while the other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute monarch.