MANU/SC/0887/2002
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Appeal (civil) 7519-7520 of 1995
Decided On: 25.10.2002
Appellants: Rayalseema Paper Mills Ltd. and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Government of A.P. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
V.N. Khare, Ashok Bhan and S.B. Sinha, JJ.
Counsels:
Kailash Vasdev, G.L. Sanghi, Shanti Bhushan and M.N. Rao, Sr. Advs., V.D. Khanna, S.S. Shandilya, Shri Narain, Sandeep Narain, Rahul Ray, Umesh Kumar Khaitan, A.T. Patra, O.P. Khaitan, Raj Panjwani, Vijay Panjwani, Iqbal Shamsi, T.V. Raman and K. Subba Rao, Advs. for the appearing parties
Subject: Commercial
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 14
Cases Referred:
Union of India and Anr. v. Cvnamide India Limited and Anr. MANU/SC/0076/1987
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  1

Case Note:
Commercial  - State action - Fixation of rates of royalty on bamboo and hardwood to the paper industry in the Andhra Pradesh - Scope of judicial scrutiny would be far less where the price fixation is not governed by the statute or a statutory order - Where the legislature has prescribed the factors which should be taken into consideration and which should guide the determination of price, the courts would examine whether the considerations for fixing the price mentioned in the statute or the statutory order has been kept in mind while fixing the price and whether these factors have guided the determination - Courts would not go beyond that point - Though any arbitrary action taken by the state would be subject to the scrutiny by the courts- It is open to the government to fix such price as it thinks appropriate having regard to public interest such as interest of revenue, environment, ecology, the need of mills and the requirements of other consumers - Committee having recommended the rates after taking into consideration all relevant factors the government's acceptance of the same cannot be considered to be arbitrary or unreasonable.
Industry: Paper and Packaging
JUDGMENT
Ashok Bhan, J.
1. These sets of appeal arise from a common judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Andhra Pradesh whereby the said High Court has rejected the appellants' challenge to the fixation of rates of royalty on bamboo and hardwood to the paper industry in Andhra Pradesh. For the sake of convenience, we would refer to the facts and contentions in civil Appeal Nos. 7519-20 of 1995 arising from Writ Appeal No. 591 of 1984 and Writ Petition No. 3927 of 1987 filed by Sree Rayalaseema Paper Mills Ltd. It was stated by the counsel for both the parties before us, as was done before the High Court, that these appeals can be taken as representative of the facts and contentions in all the appeals.
2. Relevant facts for determining the points raised in these appeals are:
Till the year 1975 there were only tow Paper Mills in the State of Andhra Pradesh, namely, (1) Sirpur Paper Mills, and (2) Andhra Pradesh Paper Mills Ltd. to which the Government was supplying hard and soft wood for manufacture of paper at concessional rates. These rates were being fixed every five years. By a memorandum dated 2nd September, 1975 the Government of Andhra Pradesh in Forest and Rural Development Department, fixed royalty rates at Rs. 30/- per Tonne for barked handwood and Rs. 60/- per Tonne for barked softwood for a period of 5 years commencing from 1-10-1975. The Chief Conservator of Forests was requested to get the agreement drafted and furnish to the Government for approval after enquiring into the needs of the mills and after locating the areas in consultation with the mills for the supply of hard and soft wood. The duration of agreement was to be for 20 years. Pending the finalisation of the agreement, the Chief Conservator of Forests was requested to allow the mills to have the wood on payment of royalty, as indicated above, on ad hoc basis after obtaining an undertaking from the mills that they would abide by the conditions prescribed by the Government for the supplies to be effected.
3. Another factor which needs to be mentioned although not relevant for the purpose of these appeals is that on a representation made by Rayalaseema Paper Mills Limited and Bhadrachalam paper Boards Limited which were set up in a backward area, Government of Andhra Pradesh by G.O.Ms. No. 665 dated 15th July, 1976, a further concession in the rate of royalty on bamboo and hard wood by 50% was extended to these two mills for a period of 5 years from the date of their going into production. On a further request made by them the period of concession was extended from 5 to 10 years subject to the condition that Government reserved its right to review the position after first 5 years. This concession commenced from 1.10.1978. Concessional period of first five years expired on 30th September, 1983. The Government of Andhra Pradesh reviewed the matter and issued orders contained in G.O.Ms. No. 65 dated 9.2.1984 withdrawing the said concession altogether w.e.f. 1.10.1983. G.O.Ms. No. 65 dated 9.2.1984 was challenged by filing writ petitions which were dismissed by the single Judge of the High Court. Further appeal filed before the Division Bench was also dismissed. However, it was held that the said G.O.Ms. being administrative in character, could not be given retrospective effect. This judgment became final between the parties.
4. To continue with the facts from the previous paragraph the rates of royalty fixed by the Government Memorandum dated 2.9.1975 @ Rs. 60/- per Tonne for barked soft including Bamboo and Rs. 30/- per Tonne for barked hard wood were valid for the period 1-10-1975 to 30th September, 1980. The Government desired to fix revised royalty rates for the next five years. It appears that the Chief Conservators of Forests submitted proposals in February and June, 1980 suggesting a rate of Rs. 425/- per Metric Tonne for bamboo and Rs. 75/- per Metric Tonne for fixed hardwood for supply to Paper Mills. He based his figures on the minimum cost of production as per policy accepted by the Central Board of Forests. The Government, however, appointed a Committee of officials to consider the factors relating to fixation of royalty rates on the forest produce to be supplied to wood based industries on a sustained basis, and to make recommendations to the Government. The Committee consisted of
1. Secretary to Government, Forests & Rural Development Department (Chairman)
2. Joint Secretary, Industries and Commerce Department (Member),
3. Deputy Secretary, Finance & Planning (Member),
4. Managing Director, A.P. Forest Development Corporation (Member), and
5. Chief Conservator of Forest (member/Secretary).
5. The Committee called upon the wood-based industries for such information, as they liked, for consideration of the committee. After looking into the material supplied by the Mills and other material gathered by it, and after examining the several alternative methods for determining the price of forest produce, the committee was of the opinion that the cost of regeneration be taken to be the price at which the forest produce shall be supplied to these industries. On this basis, it opined that for the five year period commencing from 1.10.1980, the rate of royalty for bamboo may be fixed at Rs. 284/- per Metric Tonne and for hardwood at Rs. 135/- per Metric Tonne. The Committee further recommended that instead of fixing a uniform flat rate for the entire 5 year period, it would be desirable to fix royalty at a sliding rate with annual increases limited to the prevailing rates of interest. The Government accepted the recommendations of the Committee and accordingly issued G.O.Ms. No. 538 dated 4.11.1981. It directed that the "rates for royalty on the forest raw materials, namely, the bamboo and the hardwood which are to be supplied to the wood based industries shall, with effect from the base year 1980-81 be as follows:
Year (Bamboo per M.T. w.e.f. 1.10.1980) Hardwood per M.T. (w.e.f. 1.4.1980)
1 2 3
1980-81 210 100
1981-82 233 111
1982-83 258 123
1983-84 287 137
1984-85 318 152......."
In paragraph 6 of the said G.O., the Government stated:-
"6. The Committee has also envisaged that the arrangements should be worked out to ensure that adequate funds are provided for raising pulpwood plantations and for improving the management of forests for sustained supply to the industries. Accordingly, the Government have to decide to create the 'Industrial Plantation Fund' from out of the additional royalty revenues revised annually to meet the said requirements."
6. As per this G.O., the rates of royalty for bamboo suddenly went up from Rs. 60/- to Rs. 210/- per Metric Tonne and the rates continued to rise with each passing year. However, so far as Rayalseema Paper Mills and Bhadrachalam Paper Boards Limited were concerned, they were entitled to 50% concession for a period of five years commencing from 1.10.1978. It was liable to pay only half of the said royalty rate. The five year concession period expired on 30th September, 1983. It was not extended further as indicated earlier in para No. 3 of this judgment.
7. The validity of G.O.Ms. No. 538 dated 4.11.1981 was challenged by filing writ petitions on two grounds.
(i) by an executive order the Government cannot enhance the rates of royalty for purposes of developmental activities of the State. Such an enhancement amounts to levy of tax, and no tax can be levied except under Statute; and
(ii) the increase in the rates of royalty contrary to agreement is unreasonable.
8. On behalf of the State preliminary objection was raised with respect to the maintainability of the writ petitions. It was submitted that the revision in the rates of royalty had been made in accordance with the conditions of the agreement entered into between the parties and that, in such a case, Article 14 of the Constitution has no application.
9. The single Judge upheld the preliminary objection and held that where there was a concluded contract, Article 14 could not be invoked, even though one of the contracting parties was the Government. On this ground alone all the writ petitions except the writ petition No. 1641 of 1982 filed by A.P. Rayans Limited were ordered to be dismissed. So far as the writ petition No. 1641 of 1982 is concerned, the learned Judge found that the facts of that case were different inasmuch as the original period of five years in its case had not expired and the Government could not increase the rates before the expiry of five years stipulated in the Government G.O. It was left open to the Government to revise the rates or apply the rates contemplated in G.O.Ms. No. 538 dated 4.11.1981 to A.P. Rayons Limited as well after the expiry of five years from the date of agreement was entered upon.
10. Single Judge had disposed of the writ petitions by a common judgment. Appellants being aggrieved filed writ appeals. In writ appeals the appellants did not question the correctness of the judgment of the Single Judge, in so far as it held that the enhancement of royalties did not amount to levy of tax. Counsel, however, disputed the correctness of the other findings including the finding regarding the maintainability of the writ petitions. The Division Bench upheld the objections raised by the appellants regarding the maintainability of the writ petitions and held that the writ petitions were maintainable and proceeded to examine the matters on merits. During the pendency of the writ appeals, the Government further revised the rates for the next quinquennium started from 1985-86 to 1989-90 by issuing G.O.Ms. No. 378 dated 12th September, 1985. Appellants filed writ petitions which were admitted and ordered to be disposed of with the writ appeals challenging the order of the Single Judge for the earlier quinquennium from 1980 to 1985 upholding the G.O.Ms. No. 538 dated 4.11.1981.
11. On merits the Division Bench examined the dispute between the parties in great detail. After examining the report submitted by the Committee and the order passed thereon by the Government rejected the contentions of the counsel appearing for the appellants to the effect that what was sold to the appellants natural growth (bamboo), replacement cost should not be the criteria for fixing the rates of royalty. It was held that not only can the replacement cost be the criteria, but the State could also fix the price keeping in mind several other factors, like, public revenue, ecology and environment, availability of forest produce, the need of other consumers and even to compel the mills to turn to alternative raw materials. That the State cold not be called upon in the absence of any law laying down the criteria for fixing the rates of royalty, to account for the manner in which, or the basis upon which the State has to determine the royalty as explained in the reasoning of the said judgment.
12. Shri Shanti Bhushan, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants did not dispute the propositions that price fixation is neither the function nor the forte of the court, it is neither concerned with the policy nor the rates. But the Court cannot deny to itself to jurisdiction to enquire into the question, in appropriate proceedings, whether relevant consideration have gone in and irrelevant considerations kept out of the determination of the price. Referring to the facts of the present case, it was contended that the Government, in a arbitrary and in unrealistic manner, unmindful of the question of survival of the paper industries, could not increase the rates 5 times from Rs. 60/- to Rs. 210/-. Public interest demands that the paper industries should be kept alive. In such a situation, fixation of an 'impossible' price, which the mills cannot bear, would be an unreasonable and arbitrary act on the part of the Government requiring the stepping in of the courts. Such an act would be adverse to the public interest and totally arbitrary. It was further contended that even if conceding that the government could revise the rates after every five years, it could not stagger the rates of royalty over the period, thus, giving an increase for every subsequent year within the same quinquennium which amounted to increase of rates of royalty for every year instead of being after every five years. That because of the arbitrary increase in price some of the mills have become sick and unviable. Counsel appearing in the other appeals supplemented these two basis submissions of Shri Shanti Bhushan.
13. We now proceed to examine these contentions.
14. Before we enter the discussion, it is made clear that the determination of rates of royalty for supply of forest produce to paper mills is not governed by any statute or a statutory order. The Government while entering into the agreement with the papers mills had undertaken to supply a certain specified quantity of wood each year for a period of 20 years. The government had not assured the mills that it will supply bamboo and other forest produce required by them at a particular rate. Nor was there an agreement between them with respect to the manner in which the rates of royalty would be determined. There was no assurance that the mills would be consulted or associated while fixing the rates of royalty. Even where the matter is governed by a statute or a statutory order, the scope of judicial enquiry is limited. This Court in Union of India and Anr. v. Cynamide India Limited and Anr. MANU/SC/0076/1987 : [1987]2SCR841 examined the scope of judicial interference in the matters of price fixation and observed:
"We start with the observation, 'Price fixation is neither the function nor the forte of the Court'. We concern ourselves neither with the policy nor with the rates. But we do not totally deny ourselves the jurisdiction to enquire into the question, in appropriate proceedings, whether relevant considerations have gone in and irrelevant considerations kept out of the determination of the price. For example, if the legislature has decreed the pricing policy and prescribed the factors which should guide the determination of the price, we will, if necessary, enquire into the question whether the policy and the factors are present to the mind of the authorities specifying the price. But our examination will stop there. We will go no further. We will not deluge ourselves with more facts and figures. The assembling of the raw materials and the mechanics of price fixation are the concern of the executive and we leave it to them. And, we will not re-evaluate the considerations even if the prices are demonstrably injurious to some manufacturers or producers. The court will, of course, examine if there is any hostile discrimination. That is a different 'cup of tea' altogether.
The second observation we wish to make is, legislative action, plenary or subordinate, is not subject to rules of natural justice. In the case of parliamentary legislation, the proposition is self-evident. In the case of subordinate legislation, it may happen that Parliament may itself provide for a notice and for a hearing-there are several instances of the legislature requiring the subordinate are legislating authority to give public notice and a public hearing before say, for example, levying a municipal rate - in which case the substantial non-observance of the statutorily prescribed mode of observing natural justice may have the effect of invalidating the subordinate legislation. The right here given to rate payers or others is in the nature of a concession which is not to detract from the character of the activity as legislative and not quasi-judicial. But, where the legislature has not chosen insist upon it and it will not be permissible to read natural justice into such legislative activity.
Occasionally, the legislature directs the subordinate legislating body to make such enquiry as it thinks fit' before making the subordinate legislation. In such a situation, while such enquiry by the subordinate legislating body as it deems fit is a condition precedent to the subordinate legislation, the nature and the extent of the enquiry is in the discretion of the subordinate legislating body and the subordinate legislation is not open to question on the ground that the enquiry was not as full as it might have been. The provision for 'such enquiry as it thinks fit' is generally an enabling provision, intended to facilitate the subordinate legislating body to obtain relevant information from all and whatever source and not intended to vest any right in anyone other than the subordinate legislating body. It is the sort of enquiry which the legislature itself may cause to be made before legislating an enquiry which will not confer any right on anyone."