MANU/SC/0043/1985
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petitions Nos. 8209 and 8821 of 1983
Decided On: 12.03.1985
Appellants:Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra, Dehradun and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:State of U.P. and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.N. Sen, P.N. Bhagwati and Ranganath Misra, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: M.K. Ramamurthi, B. Dutta, Anil Diwan, L.M. Singhvi and O.P. Rana, Advs
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961; Mines Act, 1952
Case Note:
Constitution - ecological balance - petition involving question of environment protection and maintenance of ecological balance in process of mining in lime stone quarries - two separate expert committee formed Court and Government recommended closer of certain mines and stopping of mining in certain mining area - recommendations of both committee accepted and direction given to close mining in mines specified in reports of expert committee.

ORDER
1. This case has been argued at great length before us not only because a large number of lessees of lime stone quarries are involved and each of them has pains-takingly and exhaustively canvassed his factual as well as legal points of view but also because this is the first case of its kind in the country involving issues relating to environment and ecological balance and the questions arising for considerations are of grave moment and significance not only to the people residing in the Mussoorie Hill range forming part of the Himalayas but also in their implications to the welfare of the generality of people living in the country. It brings into sharp focus the conflict between development and conservation and serves to emphasise the need for reconciling the two in the larger interest of the country. But since having regard to the voluminous material placed before us and the momentous issues raised for decision, it is not possible for us to prepare a full and detailed judgment immediately and at the same time, on account of interim order made by us, mining operations carried out through blasting have been stopped and the ends of justice require that the lessees of lime stone quarries should know, without any unnecessary delay, as to where they stand in regard to their lime stone quarries, we propose to pass our order on the writ petitions. The reasons for the order will be set out in the judgment to follow later.
2. We had by Order dated 11 August 1983 appointed a Committee consisting of Shri D.N. Bhargav, Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur, Shri M.S. Kahlon, Director General of Mines Safety and Col. P. Mishra, Head of the Indian Photo Interpretation Institute (National Remote Sensing Agency) for the purpose of inspecting the lime stone quarries mentioned in the writ petition as also in the list submitted by the Government of Uttar Pradesh. This Committee which we shall hereinafter for the sake of convenience refer to as the Bhargav Committee, submitted three reports after inspecting most of the lime stone quarries and it divided the lime stone quarries into three groups. The lime stone quarries comprised in category A were those where in the opinion of the Bhargav Committee the adverse impact of the mining operations was relatively less pronounced; category B comprised those lime stone durries where in the opinion of the Bhargav Committee the adverse impact of mining operations was relatively more pronounced and category C covered those lime stone quarries which had been directed to be closed down by the Bhargav Committee under the orders made by us on account of deficiencies regarding safety and hazards of more serious nature.
3. It seems that the Government of India also appointed a working Group on Mining of Lime Stone Quarries in Dehradun Mussoorie area, some time in 1983. The Working Group was also headed by the same Sh. D.N. Bhargav who was a member of the Bhargav Committee appointed by us. There were five other members of the Working Group along with Shri D.N. Bhargav and one of them was Dr. S. Mudgal who was at the relevant time Director in the Department of Environment, Government of India and who placed the report of the Working Group before the Court along with his affidavit. The Working Group in its report submitted in September 1983 made a review of lime stone quarry leases for continuance or discontinuance of mining operations and after a detailed consideration of various aspects recommended that the lime stone quarries should be divided into two categories, namely category 1 and category 2; category 1 comprising lime stone quarries considered suitable for continuance of mining operations and category 2 comprising lime stone quarries which were considered unsuitable for further mining.
4. It is interesting to note that the lime stone quarries comprised in category A of the Bhargav Committee Report were the same lime stone quarries which wore classified in category 1 by the Working Group and the lime stone quarries in categories B and C of the Bhargav Committee Report were classified in category 2 of the Report of the Working Group. It will thus be seen that both the Bhargav Committee and the Working Group were unanimous in their view that the lime stone quarries classified in category A by the Bhargav Committee Report and category 1 by the Working Group were suitable for continuance of mining operations. So far as the lime stone quarries in category C of the Bhargav Committee Report are concerned, they were regarded by both the Bhargav Committee and the Working Group as unsuitable for continuance of mining operations and both were of the view that they should be closed down. The only difference between the Bhargav Committee and the Working Group was in regard to lime stone quarries classified in category B. The Bhargav Committee Report took the view that these lime stone quarries need not be closed down, but it did observe that the adverse impact of mining operations in these lime stone quarries was more pronounced, while the Working Group definitely took the view that these lime stone quarries were not suitable for further mining.
5. While making this Order we are not going into the various ramifications of the arguments advanced before us but we may observe straight away that we do not propose to rely on the Report of Prof. K.S. Valdia, who was one of the members of the Expert Committee appointed by us by our Order dated 2nd September 1983, as modified by the Order dated 25 October 1983. This Committee consisted of Prof. K.S. Valdia, Slid Hukum Singh and Shri D.N. Kaul and it was appointed to enquire and investigate into the question of disturbance of ecology and pollution and affectation of air, water and environment by reason of quarrying operations or stone crushers or lime stone kilns. Shri D.N. kaul and Shri Hukum Singh submitted a joint report in regard to the various aspects while Prof. K.S. Valdia submitted a separate report. Prof. K S. Valdia's Report was confined largely to the geological aspect and in the report he placed considerable reliance on the Main Boundary Thrust (hereinafter shortly referred to as M.B.T.) and he took the view that the lime stone quarries which were dangerously close to the M.B.T. should be closed down, because they were in this sensitive and vulnerable belt. We shall examine this Report in detail when we give our reason but we may straight away point out that we do not think it safe to direct continuance or discontinuance of mining operations in lime stone quarries on the basis of the M.B.T. We are therefore not basing our conclusions on the Report of Prof. K.S. Valdia but while doing so we may add that we do not for a moment wish to express any doubt on the correctness of his Report.
6. We shall also examine in detail the question as to whether lime stone deposits act as aquifers or not. But there can be no gain saying that lime stone quarrying and excavation of the lime stone deposits do seem to affect the perennial water springs. This environmental disturbance has however to be weighed in the balance against the need of lime stone quarrying for industrial purposes in the country and we have taken this aspect into account while making this order.
7. We are clearly of the view that so far as the lime stone quarries classified in category C in the Bhargav Committee Report are concerned which have already been closed down under the directions of the Bhargav Committee, should not be allowed to be operated. If the leases of these lime stone quarries have obtained any stay order from any court permitting them to continue the mining operations, such stay order will stand dissolved and if there are any subsisting leasees in respect of any of these lime stone quarries they shall stand terminated without any liability against the State of Uttar Pradesh. If there are any suits or writ petitions for continuance of expired or unexpired leases in respect of any of these lime stone quarries pending, they will stand dismissed.