MANU/SC/0415/1988
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 8209 and 8821 of 1983
Decided On: 30.08.1988
Appellants: Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra
Vs.
Respondent: State of U. P.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
M.M. Dutt and Ranganath Misra, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: M.K. Banerjee, M.K. Ramamurthi, K. Ganguli, A.K. Sen and R.K. Jain, Advs
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - ARTICLE 48-A; CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - ARTICLE 51-A; FOREST (CONSERVATION) ACT, 1980 - SECTION 2
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 48-A, Constitution Of India - Article 51-A, Forest (conservation) Act, 1980 - Section 2; Indian Forest Act, 1927 - Section 2, Indian Forest Act, 1927 - Section 20, Indian Forest Act, 1927 - Section 27, Indian Forest Act, 1927 - Section 3, Indian Forest Act, 1927 - Section 4
Cases Referred:
Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra, Dehradun and Ors. vs. State of U.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0043/1985; Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra, Dehradun and Ors. vs. State of U.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0042/1985; Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra and Ors. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0111/1986; Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra vs. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0398/1987; Ambalal Manibhai Patel vs. State of Gujarat MANU/SC/0049/1986; State of Bihar vs. Banshi Ram Modi and Ors. MANU/SC/0012/1985; State of Rajasthan vs. Hari Shankar Rajendra Pal MANU/SC/0031/1965
Disposition:
Disposed of
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  2

Distinguished
  1

Case Note:
Constitution - ecological protection - mining in Doon valley - Apex Court directed to close down mining by all companies except three State owned companies - direction also given to constitute committee with representatives of Union Government and States to rehabilitate mine owners who lost mining areas due to Order of close down - Supreme Court constituted Monitoring Committee to monitor afforestation program.

JUDGMENT
Ranganath Misra, J.
1. On July 14, 1983, a letter received from the Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendera, Dehradun, bearing the date July 2, 1983, was directed to be registered as a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution and notice was ordered to the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Collector of Dehradun. Allegations of unauthorised and illegal mining in the Mussoorie-Dehradun belt which adversely affected the ecology of the area and led to environmental disorder were made. Later on another application with similar allegations was directed to be tagged with the earlier one. That is how these two writ petitions were both in the registry of this Court in a very innocuous manner as public interest litigation. The number of parties inflated both under the orders of the Court and on application to be added. Apart from the Governments of the Union and of Uttar Pradesh, several governmental agencies and mining lessees appeared in the proceedings. What initially appeared to be two simple applications for limited relief got expanded into a comprehensive litigation requiring appointment of committees, inspection and reports in them from time to time, serious exercises on the part of the mine owners before the committees, filing of affidavits both original and further, and lengthy arguments at the Bar. These also necessitated several comprehensive interlocutory directions and orders. These two writ petitions are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2. On August 11, 1983, this Court appointed a Committee for inspection of the mines with a view to securing assistance in the determination as to whether safety standards laid down in the Mines Act of 1952 and the Rules made thereunder have been followed and whether there was any danger of land-slide on account of quarrying operations particularly during the rainy season, and if there was any other hazard to any individual, cattle or agricultural lands on account of carrying of the mining operations. At the preliminary stage this Court directed total stopping of blasting operations which, however, was modified later. The said Committee, referred to as the Bhargava Committee after its Chairman, classified the mines which it inspected into three groups, being A, B and C. It took note of the fact that earlier an Expert Committee known as the Working Group had been set up by the Union Government which had also inspected these mines. The Bhargava Committee was of the view that the C Group mines should be totally stopped; in the A Group mines, quarrying could be carried on after ensuring that there was no ecological or environmental hazard; and in regard to the B Group mines, the Committee opined that those may not be closed down permanently but the matter should be probed further.
3. A three-Judge Bench of this Court by an order dated March 12, 1985 MANU/SC/0043/1985 : [1985]3SCR169 directed closure of the C category mines as also certain B category mines on permanent basis and gave directions in regard to further action to be taken by the Bhargava Committee. While making the order the Court specifically stated that the reasons for the order would follow. One of the learned Judges constituting the three-Judge Bench retired from the Court on September 30, 1985, and the said learned Judge (A.N. Sen, J.) expressed his views in a short order dated 30th September, 1985. The working Group appointed by the Union Government was also headed by the same Mr. Bhargava and had five other members. The examination by the two Committees appeared to be with the same object, namely, as to whether the mining was being properly done and whether such activity should be carried on in this area. The Working Group and classified the mines into two categories being I and II. They put those mines which according to them were suitable for continuing operation under Category I and the mines which in their opinion were unsuitable for further mining under Category II. An interesting feature in these two Reports seems to be that almost the same lime stone quarries which have been put by the Bhargava Committee under Category A feature in Category I of the Working Group. This Court in its order of March 12, 1985, referred to those aspects and pointed out:
It will thus be seen that both the Bhargav Committee and the Working Group were unanimous in their view that the lime stone quarries classified in category A by the Bhargav Committee Report and category I by the Working Group were suitable for continuance of mining operations. So far as the lime stone quarries in category C of the Bhargav Committee Report are concerned, they were regarded by both the Bhargav Committee and the Working Group as unsuitable for continuance of mining operations and both were of the view that they should be closed down. The only difference between the Bhargav Committee and the Working Group was in regard to lime stone quarries classified in category B.
This Court had also appointed an Expert Committee consisting of Prof. K.S. Valdia, Mr. Hukum Singh and Mr. D.N. Kaul to enquire and investigate into the question of disturbance of ecology and pollution and affectation of air, water and environment by reason of quarrying operations or stone crushers and setting up of lime stone kilns. Mr. Kaul and Mr. Hukum Singh submitted a joint report with reference to various aspects indicated in their order of appointment while Prof. Valdia submitted a separate report. In the order of March 12, 1985, this Court took note of the position that Prof. Valdia's report was confined largely to the geological aspect and considerable reliance on the Main Boundary Thrust (MBT) had been placed by him in making of the report and he had taken the view that the lime stone quarries which were dangerously close to the MBT should be closed down inasmuch as that was a sensitive and vulnerable belt. This Court then took the view that not much importance could be placed to Dr. Valdia's report for this litigation. The joint report submitted by Mr. Kaul and Mr. Hukum Singh had been taken into account by this Court in making interim directions and for the making of the final order no specific reference is called for.
4. In the order of March 12, 1985, this Court directed that the C Category mines of the Bhargav Committee Report should be closed down permanently and if any mining lessee of such a mine was running under the first grant or under Court's orders after its expiry, it would not be entitled to take advantage of the position. Similar order was made in regard to the B category mines situated in the Shasradhara block. This Court directed A category mines located within the Mussoorie municipal limits and the remaining B category mines to submit schemes subjected to further enquiry and ordered:
We accordingly appoint a high powered Committee consisting of Mr. D. Bandyopadhyay, Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development as Chairman, and Shri H.S. Ahuja, Director General, Mines Safety, Dhanbad, Bihar, Shri D.N. Bhargav, Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines, New Secretariat Building, Nagpur and two experts to be nominated by the Department of Environment, Government of India within four weeks from the date of this Order. The lessees of the lime stone quarries classified as category A in Bhargav Committee Report and for Category I in the Working Group Report and falling within the city limits of Mussoorie as also the lessees of the lime stone quarries classified as category B in the Bhargav Committee Report will be at liberty to submit a full and detailed scheme for mining their lime stone quarries to this Committee (hereinafter called the Bandyopadhyay Committee) and if any such scheme or schemes are submitted the Bandyopadhyay Committee will proceed to examine the same without any unnecessary delay and submit a report to this Court whether in its opinion the particular lime stone quarry can be allowed to be operated in accordance with the scheme and if so, subject to what conditions and if it cannot be allowed to be operated, the reasons for taking that view. The Bandyopadhyay Committee in making its report will take into account the various aspects which we had directed the Bhargav Committee and the Kaul Committee to consider while making their reports including the circumstances that the particular lime stone quarry may or may not be within the city limits of Mussoorie and also give an opportunity to the concerned lessee to be heard, even though it be briefly.
Several mining lessees submitted their schemes which were examined by the Committee but none of them was cleared. Objections against rejection of the schemes had been filed before this Court by many of the aggrieved lessees. It was directed in the aforesaid order of 12th March, 1985, that until the Bandyopadhyay Committee cleared the particular mines for operation, mining activity in regard to all mines covered within the purview of examination by that Committee would stop. This Court, however, allowed A category mines located outside the city limits to operate. While directing closure of the Shasradhara area B category mines and all the C category mines, as also A and B category mines within the municipal limits, this Court made it clear that the ban indicated by it would supersede any order of any other court. The Court observed:
The consequence of this Order made by us would be that the lessees of lime stone quarries which have been directed to be closed down permanently under this Order or which may be directed to be closed down permanently after consideration of the report of the Bandyopadhyay Committee, would be thrown out of business in which they have invested large sums of money and expanded considerable time and effort. This would undoubtedly cause hardship to them but it is a price that has to be paid for protecting and safeguarding the right of the people to live in healthy environment with minimal disturbance of ecological balance and without avoidable hazard to them and to their cattle, homes and agricultural land and undue affectation of air, water and environment.
The Order of 12th March, 1985, did not refer to the Forest (Conservation) Act of 1980 when it permitted the A category lime stone quarries located outside the city limits to operate.
5. This Court made several orders relating to specific aspects after the order of 12th March, 1985. One such order was made on 30th May, 1985, MANU/SC/0042/1985 : AIR1985SC1259 , another on 18th December, 1986, MANU/SC/0111/1986 : [1987]1SCR641 where reasons for the order of 12th March, 1985, were given, and yet another order was made on 19th October, 1987 MANU/SC/0398/1987 : AIR1987SC2426 . We shall refer to the last of these orders in a later part of this Judgment. In the order of 16th December, 1986, when the reasonings for the order dated 12th March, 1985 were given, this Court had stated:
It is for the Government and the Nation-and not for the Court to-decide whether the deposits should be exploited at the cost of ecology and environmental considerations or the industrial requirement should be otherwise satisfied. It may be perhaps possible to exercise greater control and vigil over the operation and strike a balance between preservation and utilisation; that would indeed be a matter for an expert body to examine and on the basis of appropriate advice, Government should take a policy decision and firmly implement the same.
The Court had also indicated in its earlier order that it should be ensured that the low grade cilica content lime stone is specifically utilised only in special industries having regard to its quality and should not be wasted by being utilised for purposes for which this special grade lime stone is not required.
6. Keeping these aspects in view, the Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Department of Environment, Forests and wildlife, constituted a Committee to examine the working of the lime stone mining operations in the Doon Valley by its memorandum No. J-20012/48/86-1A, dated 30th of December, 1986, which was also called the Working Group. Shri D.N. Bhargava was nominated as Chairman and the Committee had three other members, namely, Shri V.C. Verma, Director General, Mines Safety, Dhanbad; Prof. B.B. Dhar, Department of Mining Engineering of the Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi; and Shri R. Mehta, Principal Scientific Officer, Department of Environment, Forest and Wildlife, New Delhi. Shri Verma was substituted by Shri N. Mishra, Deputy Director General, Northern Zone. The terms of reference of the Committee were:
(i). Whether the operations are being carried out on scientific lines?
(ii) Whether the limestone quarried is being supplied to end-users as stipulated by the Supreme Court?; and
(iii) The extent to which the mining operations are contributing to environmental damage?
This Committee visited the six mines which are operating and indicated:
The limestone deposits of Dehradun-Mussoorie area are highly valuable mineral resource now essentially required by the steel industry and it would be necessary to exploit them, of course, in a very planned and systematic manner.
The Committee addressed itself to two aspects, namely,-
(i) those which were considered suitable for mining operations, and
(ii) those which were considered unsuitable for further mining.
The Committee whose entire report has been made available to us came to the following conclusions in regard to each of the six operating mines.
(i) Lambidhar Limestone Mine of M/s. Uttar Pradesh State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. (UPSMDC) is a State Undertaking and holds a mining lease of 97 hectares covering the Lambidhar Hills and the lease is valid up to 10th March, 1996. The Committee found that 36% of its production was supplied to steel and chemical industries, 12% to sugar, 6% to cement and other miscellaneous industries and 46% to chips and lime kilns industries and disapproved this position. It further found that while colour limestone which is a metamarphose is being recorded as a minor mineral whereas it was learnt that it was being used for despatch as major mineral. The arrangement for classification of the lime stone also was not acceptable to the Committee. It further found:
The hill slopes and the river/nallah base are covered by scree generated both during road construction as well as subsequent mining operations. This is the result of allowing the excavated material to roll down the slopes. The Committee is of the opinion that road making may be done with front-end loader instead of bulldozer as with latter equipment excavated materials roll down the hill slope uncontrollably . The vegetation cover along the slopes has been damaged by the rolling material as well as the excavation made for the road making and the hills present an ugly look. Hydro-seeding may be done to improve looks of hill slopes. Deposition of debris/scree in the nullahs specially in Betarli is the cause of concern because it happens to be one Of the main steams which is source of water supply to the villages as well as Dehradun city. The approach road has reached the top and mining operations have been started but not work on reclamation of mined out area has yet commenced. A proper disposal yard for stocking debris must be provided so that the present practice of disposing it near the camp office on the bank of the rivulet is prevented. Details of arrangements for controlling dust both in mining and crushing operations are not available.
UPSMDC is the largest of the working mines and apart from the fact that it belongs to the Government of Uttar Pradesh, it has also the largest of investment. It has been claimed before us on its behalf that it operates most scientifically and satisfies all the requirements appropriate for ecological and environmental safeguards. The Report of the Committee, extracted above, negatives all these claims.
(ii) We shall now refer to M/S Punjab Lime and Limestone Company which has two mines both of which are working. Lease No. 14 covers 44.5 hectares and is a lease for 20 years from 1966; as such it has already expired. Lease No. 96 is for 28.92 hectares and would expire in December, 1989. Lease No. 14 had two areas and this Court disallowed mining in the Northern block. The Committee found that 16.4 hectares equal to 41 acres, out of lease No. 96 comprised of thick forest and the lessee had surrendered the forest area. The mining operation is being carried on in lease No. 14 under orders of the Court and the residual portion of lease No. 96. The Committee found that the scheme which had been offered to the Bandyopadhyay Committee was in regard to the mining in the northern block of lease No. 14 which has since been abandoned. It further transpires that about 27% of its output during 1986 was supplied for the steel industry. The report indicates that there is little generation of scree. As there is sparse growth of trees in the area covered by the mines, no significant deforestation is involved. Disposal of overburden is not significant. Check dams have been set up in the lower reaches which are on the right bank of Bhitarli river and no significant fall of the scree into the river was apprehended.
(iii) Next is lease No. 72 of Shri R.K. Oberai which would expire on 10th of April, 1994. It has an area of 15.91 hectares. The Committee found that this mine lies in the upper reaches of the Song river. Thick forest growth is seen close to the mine and the Committee gathered that the forest authorities have declined permission to extend the mine workings beyond RL 1280. The Committee found that the lessee has undertaken to carry out afforestation and has also started compensatory forestory in the adjacent areas. There was no apprehension of spreading of scree and future mining operations are not likely to involve any significant deforestation. The Committee also has opined that there is no apprehension of choking of the water-ways due to mining operations as the Song river flows about 400 mts. away.
7. Apart from these three mines which are operating under valid mining leases, the Committee inspected the mines corresponding to lease Nos. 16, 17 and 76, belonging to Ved Pal Singh Chaudhary, Seth Ram Avtar and Shri C.G. Gujral respectively. All these leases have expired in December, 1982, and under orders of different courts mining is being carried on.
8. Bhitarli Kalan Limestone Mines of Shri Ved Pal Singh Chaudhary was a lease for 38.8 hectares and expired on 29th December, 1982. This Court has already directed closure of mining operation in a small area on the left bank of Bhitarli river.
9. Seth Ram Avtar has a lease of 14.18 hectares on the left bank of Bhitarli river and the lease expired on 2nd December, 1982. The Committee found that he had no environment management plan. The working plan submitted by the lessee did not show any plantation area.
10. The last of the working mines which the Committee visited is that of Shri C.G. Gujaral. The lease was for 24.16 hectares and expired on 17th December, 1982. The Committee found that the lease area contained very good forest. The rolling of scree/debris along the slopes had left not only ugly scars but also resulted in destruction of the green cover. The debris flow has also choked the Sansaru nullah which once used to be a perennial stream. There was no environmental management plan. In fact the Committee came to the conclusion that the working of this mine was not conducive to the environmental conservation.
11. We have in another part of this judgment indicated our conclusion that mining activity as a whole should be stopped in the Doon Valley area but for the reasons indicated therein, we have also come to the conclusion that the three mining lessees who have been operating under valid lease may be permitted to work subject to such conditions as have been indicated. Keeping the report of the Working Group in view and for the reasons we have elsewhere indicated, we direct that mining operations in lease Nos. 16, 17 and 76 where the respective leases have expired and mining operation is being carried on under Court's Orders, shall stop and the several orders of the courts enabling mining activity shall stand superseded.
12. This Court in its order dated 19th of October, 1987, MANU/SC/0398/1987 : AIR1987SC2426 came to the clear conclusion:
We are of the view that the stone quarrying in the Doon Valley area should generally be stopped and reasons therefore we shall provide in due course.
13. In another part of this judgment, reasons in support of that conclusion have been provided. The direction to close down the three operating mines where the period of lease has expired is to bring the position in accord with that conclusion.
14. One of the submissions advanced at the Bar is that the decision of this Court dated 12th March, 1985, was final in certain aspects including the release of the A category mines outside the city limits of Mussoorie from the proceedings and in view of such finality it is not open to this Court in the same proceedings at a latter stage to direct differently in regard to what has been decided earlier. Connected with this submission is the contention that during the pendency of these writ petitions, the Environmental (Protection) Act of 1986 has come into force and since that Statute and the Rules made thereunder provide detailed procedure to deal with the situations that arise in these cases, this Court should no more deal with the matter and leave it to be looked into by the authorities under the Act. Counsel have relied upon what was stated by this Court while giving reasons in support of the order of March 12, 1985, namely, "it is for the Government and the Nation-and not for the Court-to decide whether the deposits should be exploited at the cost of ecology and environmental considerations." In the order of 12th March, 1985, this Court had pointed out:
So far as the lime stone quarries classified as category A in the Bhargav Committee Report and/or category 1 in the Working Group Report are concerned, we would divide them into two classes, one class consisting of those lime stone quarries which are within the city limits of Mussoorie and the other consisting of those which are outside the city limits. We take the view that the lime stone quarries falling within category A of the Bhargav Committee Report and/or category 1 of the Working Group Report and falling outside the city limits of Mussoorie, should be allowed to be operated subject, of course, to the observance of the requirements of the Mines Act, 1952, the Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 and other relevant statutes, rules and regulations. Of course when we say this, we must make it clear that we are not holding that if the leases in respect of these lime stone quarries have expired and suits or writ petitions for renewal of the leases are pending in the courts, such leases should be automatically renewed. It will be for the appropriate courts to decide whether such leases should be renewed or not having regard to the law and facts of each case. So far as the lime stone quarries classified in category A in the Bhargav Committee Report and category 1 in the Working Group Report and falling within the city limits of Mussoorie are concerned, we would give the same direction which we are giving in the next succeeding paragraph in regard to the lime stone quarries classified as category B in the Bhargav Committee Report.
The argument that A category mines outside the city limits had been cleared is based upon what has been indicated above. Dealing with this part of the direction, this Court in its order of 19th October, 1987, stated:
Consciousness regarding environmental upkeep is of recent origin. Cognizance of ecological importance has entered into governmental activity only in this decade. Everyday that consciousness as also the sense of social obligation in this regard are on the increase. It has been pointed out to us in course of hearing of the objections that the classification of the A category lime stone quarries on the basis of their location-within the municipal limits and outside-was indeed not a real one. We have been shown and it seems to be factually true that some of the lime stone quarries said to be outside the city limits are closer to the heart of the city of Mussoorie that others located within the city limits. If the real purpose of the order made by this Court was not to permit mining within the city limits without further scrutiny as in the case of B category stone quarries, we really do not see any justification as to why these stone quarries located outside the city limits but close to the heart of the city should not have been subjected to such scrutiny. Since the writ petitions have not been finally disposed of and the order made in regard to the A category quarries located outside the city limits by the judgment referred to above only exempted them from further scrutiny as was directed in respect of the other quarries, we see no impediment in the matter of giving a re-look at the matter even with reference to the A category quarries located outside the city limits.
In this connection it is relevant to take note of the fact that the State Government has already formed an improvement programme of the area by constituting a combined body for Mussoorie and Dehradun. The considerations which had weighed with the Court on the basis of municipal limits has indeed to be extended not to the entire area covered by the new scheme. We are, therefore, of the view that the A category stone quarries in this area irrespective of location within or outside city limits should be subjected to further order of this Court and there is no legal impediment for this Court to do the same.
We reiterate our opinion that by the order of 12th March, 1985, the A category mining leases outside the city limits were only exempted from further scrutiny and not released from the proceedings. Our order of 18th December, 1986, left certain aspects to be considered by the State and immediately the Central Government responded by appointing the second Working Group. We would like to reiterate what we have already said in the order of 19th of October, 1987, that the examination by this Court when it made the order of 12th March, 1985, omitted to consider the impact of the Forest (Conservation) Act of 1980 which was then a statute in force. If the provisions of the Conservation Act had been noticed and impact thereof for the continuance of mining activity had been considered, perhaps the Court would have made no exemptions and no mining may have been permitted. Besides, if the Court really intended to release the A category mines outside the city limits, it could very well pronounce that in clear terms.
15. In view of what we have indicated above, it is difficult to accept the stand taken by some of the lessees and by Mr. Nariman appearing for the intervener that a final order has been by this Court in regard to the A category mines outside the city limits of Mussoorie.
16. The writ petitions before us are not inter-party disputes and have been raised by way of public interest litigation and the controversy before the Court is as to whether the social safety and for creating a hazardless environment for the people to live in, mining in the area should be permitted or stopped. We may not be taken to have said that for public interest litigations, procedural laws do not apply. At the same time it has to be remembered that every technicality in the procedural law is not available as a defence when a matter of grave public importance is for consideration before the Court. Even if it is said that there was a final order, in a dispute of this type it would be difficult to entertain the plea of res judicata.