MANU/SC/0111/1986
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petitions Nos. 8209 and 8821 of 1983
Decided On: 18.12.1986
Appellants: Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
P.N. Bhagwati, C.J. and Ranganath Misra, J.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: M.A. Krishnamoorthy, Pramod Dayal, Rishi Kesh, R.B. Mehrotra and M.G. Ramachandran, Advs
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g)
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 51A
Disposition:
Disposed of
Case Note:
Environment - Limestone quarry - Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra, made an allegation related to unauthorized and illegal mining operations carried on in Mussoorie Hills and area around adversely affecting ecology to environmental disturbances - Hence, this Petition - Held, at present Valley was in danger because of erratic, irrational and uncontrolled quarrying of limestone Green cover about 10 per cent of area while from decades ago it was almost 70 per cent - Moreover, 105 mining leases and various reports indicated that direct environmental impact on area and limestone deposits of high grade having up to 99.8 calcium carbonate - digging and blasting of limestone allowing waste to roll down had affected villages as also agricultural lands located below hills and disturbed entire ecology of area and traffic hazard for local population -Therefore, it was appreciation steps taken by Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra for Preservation of environment - Appeal disposed of.
Ratio Decidendi:
"It is duty of citizen of India to preserve environment and ecological balance of country."
JUDGMENT
Ranganath Misra, J.
1. On March 12, 1985, after hearing counsel and parties appearing in person at great length this Court made a detailed order wherein it was said;
This case has been argued at great length before us not only because a large number of lessees of limestone quarries are involved and each of them has painstakingly and exhaustively canvassed his factual as well as legal points of view but also because this is the first case of its kind in the country involving issues relating to environment and ecological balance and the questions arising for consideration are of grave moment and significance not only to the people residing in the Mussoorie Hill range forming part of the Himalayas but also in their implications to the welfare of the generality of people living in the country. It brings into sharp focus the conflict between development and conservation and serves to emphasise the need for reconciling the two in the larger interest of the country. But since having regard to the voluminous material placed before us and the momentous issues raised for decision, it is not possible for us to prepare a full and detailed judgment immediately and at the same time, on account of interim order made by us, mining operations carried out through blasting have been stopped and the ends of justice require that the lessees of limestone quarries should know, without any unnecessary delay, as to where they stand in regard to their limestone quarries, we propose to pass our order on the writ petitions. The reasons for the order will be set out in the judgment to follow later.
2. In the meantime, one of us our learned Brother Sen, J., has retired from the Court. Before that event happened, on 30th September, 1985, he delivered a judgment expressing his views on the matter. He indicated:
I do not think it necessary to give any further reasons than those which are already stated in the order made by us on 12th March, 1985. Speaking personally for myself, I think that the broad reasons have been adequately set out in the order and it would be an unnecessary exercise to elaborate them.
On a perusal of our order of the 12th March, 1985, we are inclined to agree with his view that the detailed order covered almost all the relevant aspects and touched upon every issue germane to the matter.
3. As this was the first case of its type with wide and serious ramifications, we would like to give a brief account of the manner in which the proceedings commenced, were carried on and are to be concluded.
4. By an order dated 14.7.1983, this Court directed a letter received from the Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra, Dehra Dun dated 2.7.1983 along with accompanying affidavits to be treated as a writ petition and issued notice to the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Collector of Dehra Dun. The main allegation therein related to unauthorised and illegal mining operations carried on in the Mussoorie Hills and the area around adversely affecting the ecology of the area and leading to environmental disturbances. Later on, another application was directed to be tagged on and both the applications were dealt with together. Several parties, mainly, mining lessees numbering more than 100, got impleaded either at the instance of the petitioners or on their own seeking. By a later order made in the month of July 1983, this Court directed all fresh quarrying to be stopped and called upon the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police of Dehra Dun District to strictly enforce that order.
5. On 11.8.1983, after hearing the counsel for parties then appearing, this Court appointed a Committee for the purpose of inspecting all the mines other than those belonging to the State of Uttar Pradesh and the Union of India, with a view to determining whether the safety standards laid down in the Mines Act, 1952, and the Mines Rules made thereunder were being observed or not and whether there was any danger of landslides on account of the quarrying operations particularly during the monsoon in any of the mines and if there was any other hazard to individuals, cattle or agricultural lands by reason of the carrying on of mining operations. Blasting operations in the area were also directed to be stopped. This Committee came to be known as the Bhargava Committee and its members were authorised to inspect the mines and give suitable directions. The Committee made its main report on the basis whereof this Court on August 24, 1983 permitted removal of limestone already quarried. The Committee directed closure of some of the mines and reported the defects appearing in the other mines and called upon the mine owners to carry out rectifications.
6. The Bhargava Committee classified the mines in the area into three groups being A, B and C. So far as the mines in Group (C) were concerned, the Committee was of the view that they were not suitable for continuance and should, therefore, be closed down. So far as the question related to the mines in Group A the Committee was of the opinion that the quarrying could be carried on without any environmental or ecological hazard. In regard to the B group mines, the Bhargava Committee opined that those may not be closed down permanently though it did notice the adverse impact of their mining activities. In its order of 12th March, 1985, this Court took note of the fact that the Union Government had appointed a Working Group on mining of limestone quarries in Dehra Dun and Mussoorie area some time in 1983 and the Working Group was also headed by Shri Bhargava who was heading the Committee appointed by this Court. The other members of the Working Group were experts in the field and the Working Group had submitted the report in September 1983. A comparative analysis was made by this Court in regard to the mines by referring to both the reports. The Court found that the Working Group had taken these very mines for their study and had divided the mines into two categories-namely, Class I and Class II. It transpires that all the mines then categorised as Class I were now included by the Bhargava Committee in Group A and the remaining mines now classified as Group B and C by the Bhargava Committee were in Class II.
7. This Court had also appointed an Expert Committee with Professor Valdia and two Members mainly to consider the problems of ecology and environment with reference to mining. Professor Valdia gave a separate report while the other two members gave a joint report. Dealing with the separate report furnished by Professor Valdia, this Court in its order of March 12, 1985 stated:
We may observe straightaway that we do not propose to rely on the report of Professor Valdia who was one of the Members of the Expert Committee appointed by our order dated 2.9.1983 as modified by the order dated 23rd October, 1983. This Committee consisted of Professor Valdia, Shri Hukum Singh and Shri D.N. Kaul and it was appointed to enquire and investigate into the question of disturbance of ecology and pollution and affectation of air, water and environment by reason of quarrying operations or working of stone crushers or limestone kilns. Shri Hukum Singh submitted a joint report in regard to various aspects while Professor Valdia submitted a separate report. Professor Valdia's report was confined shortly to the geological aspect and in his report he placed considerable reliance on the Main Boundary Thrust (shortly referred to as M.B.T.) and he took the view that limestone quarries which were dangerously close to M.B.T. should be closed down, because they were in the sensitive and vulnerable belt. We shall examine this report in detail when we give our reasons but we may straightaway point out that w do not think it safe to direct continuance or discontinuance of mining operations in limestone quarries on the basis of M.B.T.
At the further hearings after the said order, parties did not address arguments with reference to M.B.T. and we are of the view that this topic need not be dealt with by us. In 12th March 1985 order we directed that the limestone quarries located in Sahasradhara Block and placed in Category II by the Working Group should be closed down. We further said:
We would also direct, agreeing with the Report made by the Working Group that the limestone quarries placed in Category II by the Working Group other than those which are placed in Categories B and C by the Bhargava Committee should also not be allowed to be operated and should be closed down save and except for the limestone quarries covered by the mining leases numbers 31, 36 and 37 for which we will give the same direction as we are giving in the succeeding paragraphs in regard to the limestone quarries classified as Category B in the Bhargava Committee Report. If there are any subsisting leases in respect of any of these limestone quarries they will forthwith come to an end and if any suits or writ petitions for continuance expire or unexpired leases in respect of any of these limestone quarries are pending, they too will stand dismissed.
8. This Court directed closing down of the mines in A Category located within the municipal limits of Mussoorie.
9. In regard to B Class quarries of the Bhargava Committee Report which featured in Category II of the Working Group Report, as also of the A Category quarries within the municipal limits, we set up a Committee under the chairmanship of Shri D. Bandyopadhyay, then Secretary in the Ministry of Rural Development and called upon the mine owners to submit a full and detailed scheme to that Committee which would examine the said scheme keeping in view the provisions of the law as also the expediency of allowing mining operations in the area and report to the Court about the same. We have directed that until further orders from this Court on the basis of Bandopadhyay Committee report these mines shall not be worked. It may be pointed out that the Bandopadhyay Committee has submitted its report rejecting the schemes put forward by various lessees of the mines which have been closed down and on 20th November, 1986, this Court has directed:
We are informed that Bandopadhyay Committee has submitted its report rejecting the schemes put forward by various erstwhile lessees of the mines which have been closed down now. This Report was made as far back as in April 1986 and those who wanted to raise objections, ought to have done so within a reasonable time after the report was submitted and those who have failed to do so, we cannot shut them out and prevent them from raising their objections; and in any event delay in filing cannot prejudice public interest since stone quarrying had already closed down. We would, therefore, grant time to the erstwhile lessees of mines, who wish to raise objections, to file their objections within six weeks from to-day and reply, if any, to those objections may be filed on behalf of the petitioners and the State of Uttar Pradesh within four weeks thereafter.
The old record of the case may also be kept in Court at the time of the hearing of this Writ Petition.
Writ Petition will come up for hearing on 3rd Tuesday in February 1987 before a Bench of which Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ranganath Misra is a member.
10. From the aforesaid order it is clear that in view of the directions given by this Court the question still remains to be considered whether the schemes submitted by the mine lessees to the Bandopadhyaya Committee under our Order dated 12th March 1985 have been rightly rejected or not and whether under those schemes, the mine lessees can be allowed to carry on mining operations without in any way adversely affecting environment or ecological balance or causing hazard to individuals, cattle and agricultural lands. This question would, of course, have to be decided in the light of the view taken by us in our Order dated 12th March 1985 and the present judgment.
11. The Himalayan range on the Northern Boundary of India is the most recent mountain range and yet it is the tallest. It has formed the Northern boundary of the country and until recent times provided an impregnable protection to the Indian sub-continent from the Northern direction. This mountain range has been responsible to regulate the monsoons and consequently the rainfall in the Indo-gangetic belt. The Himalayas are the source for perennial rivers-the Ganges, Yamuna and Brahmputra as also several other tributaries which have joined these main rivers. For thousands of years nature has displaced its splendor through the lush green trees, innumerable springs and beautiful flowers. The Himalayas has been the store house of herbs, shurbs and plants. Deep forests on the lower hills have helped to generate congenial conditions for good rain.
12. The Doon Valley has been an exquisite region bounded by the Himalayan and the Shivalik ranges and the Ganga and Yamuna rivers. The perennial water streams and the fertile soil have contributed not only to the growth of dense lush green forests but have helped the yield of basmati rice and leechis. Mussoorie, known as the queen of Indian hill stations situated at a height of 5000 ft. above sea level and Dehra Doon located below the heights have turned out to be important places of tourist attraction, centers of education, research and defence complex.
13. At present the Valley is in danger because of erratic, irrational and uncontrolled quarrying of limestone. The landscape has been stripped bare of its verdant cover. Green cover today is about 10 per cent of the area while from decades ago it was almost 70 per cent.