MANU/SC/0050/2018
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 878 of 2017
Decided On: 11.01.2018
Appellants: Russel Joy
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dipak Misra, C.J.I., A.M. Khanwilkar and Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Manoj V. George, Shilpa Liza George, Amit Masih, Kamlendra Mishra and Narender Kumar Verma, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: K.K. Venugopal, AG, Pinky Anand, ASG, Subramonium Prasad, Sr. Adv./AAG, Umavathy, K.V.V. Vijayakumar, Mohan V. Katarki and G. Prakash, Advs.
Subject: Civil
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005 - Section 2(e); DISASTER MANAGEMENT ACT, 2005 - Section 9
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 2, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 9, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 11, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 11(3), Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 21, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 23, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 23(4), Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 31, Disaster Management Act, 2005 - Section 31(3); Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 32, Constitution of India - Article 131
Cases Referred:
State of Tamil Nadu v. State of Kerala and Anr. MANU/SC/0425/2014 : (2014) 12 SCC 696
Citing Reference:


Relied On
  1

Case Note:
Civil - Adequate Measures - Present petition filed seeking directions appointing technical expertise adjudging lifespan of Dam and ascertain date/period on which dam must be de-commissioned - Whether adequate measures taken for safety of dam

Facts:

The Dam was constructed under a lease agreement executed in the year 1886. There was an assertion in the petition that the Chief Engineer of the dam project, envisaged the lifetime of the dam for a period of 50 years. As 121 years have expired from the date of the construction of the dam, the decommissioning of the said dam had become essential and there was need for assessment of the lifespan of the dam for the safety of the citizens especially the persons residing downstream of the river. Hence, present Writ Petition was filed.

Held, while disposing of the appeal:

(i) The present Court issued directions that the Central Government should constitute a separate Sub-Committee, to exclusively monitor the measures for ensuring a high level of preparedness to face any disaster, which is unpredictable in relation to Dam. The State of Kerala as well as the State of Tamil Nadu should also constitute separate Sub-Committees, to exclusively monitor the measures for ensuring a high level of preparedness to face any disaster occurring from Dam, They must provide for a separate dispensation under the State plan. The State of Tamil Nadu, as directed to cooperate as per the decision in "State of Tamil Nadu v. State of Kerala and Anr.", should also have a Sub-Committee for disaster management and with a specific plan. Constitution of all sub-committees should be in addition to the existing Committees. All the States should work in harmony with the Central Sub-Committee and ensure high level preparedness to face any disaster occurring due to Dam, so that life and property are not damaged. [23]
Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, C.J.I.
1. This writ petition is preferred by a public spirited person Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India praying for issue a Writ of Mandamus directing the Government of India to appoint an international agency with the technical expertise to study and to adjudge the lifespan of Mullaperiyar Dam and ascertain the date/period on which the said dam must be de-commissioned; appoint a High Powered Committee to suggest to this Court to declare a date/time period for de-commissioning of Mullaperiyar Dam; direct the State owning the dam, that is, Tamil Nadu to make financial provisions for damages to life and restoration of environment in the eventuality of a burst of Mullaperiyar Dam before it is de-commissioned, and pass any other order or direction as this Court may deem fit and proper to do so in the facts and circumstances of the case.
2. The essential facts which need to be stated for adjudication of this petition are that Mullaperiyar Dam was constructed under a lease agreement executed in the year 1886 between the Maharaja of erstwhile Travancore with the British Secretary of State for Madras Presidency for a duration of 999 years. In pursuance of the said agreement, the dam was constructed across river Periyar in crude lime surky mortar at a time when dam engineering was in its infancy. Periyar river originates from Sivagiri and Western Ghats at an elevation of 2400 meters from the sea level and joins Mullayar river downstream at an elevation of 850 m. It is at this elevated junction, the Mullaperiyar dam was built having a height of 53.6 m (176 ft.) from the foundation and a length of 365.7 m (1,200 ft) for catering to the irrigational needs of the neighbouring State of Tamil Nadu under the said lease agreement.
3. There is an assertion in the petition that the Chief Engineer of the dam project, Mr. John Pennycuick envisaged the lifetime of the dam for a period of 50 years. As 121 years have expired from the date of the construction of the dam, the decommissioning of the said dam has become essential and there is need for assessment of the lifespan of the dam regard being had to the safety of the citizens especially the persons residing downstream of the river. There is reference to the litigations filed between the State of Kerala and State of Tamil Nadu for long period and more recently in CS (OS) No. 3 of 2006 before this Court which was decided on 07.05.2014 in State of Tamil Nadu v. State of Kerala and Anr. MANU/SC/0425/2014 : (2014) 12 SCC 696 whereby this Court apart from issuing other directions had appointed a Supervisory Committee to take measures pertaining to the dam in emergent situations.
4. It is contended in the petition that because of the efflux of time and the safety of the dam being doubtful, fear remains embedded among the people who reside downstream of the Mullaperiyar dam. That apart, the residents of the area in proximity do not feel safe. In such a situation, as set forth, precautionary steps are required to be taken to protect the life without waiting for a disaster to happen in the form of a dam burst which can be triggered due to multiple reasons. According to the Petitioner, due to the differences between State of Kerala and State of Tamil Nadu over the contractual rights over the 1886 lease agreement, they have not taken any steps to mitigate the fear or dispel the threat to life of many citizens who live in the zone of immediate catastrophe. The petition has highlighted a serious concern about the lifespan of the dam. It is contended that if it is treated to be 999, it is a speculation in the realm of impossibility which law does not accept, and is completely averse to it.
5. It is urged that safety and security of the people and that of the nation are of paramount importance and, therefore, the Respondents are obligated in law to have concrete safeguards so that there is no irreversible environmental consequences and the fear that affects the bones and brains of the citizens gets vaporised. By no stretch of imagination the lifespan of the dam can be conceived to be 999 years which is the term of the lease deed and there has to be decommissioning of the dam to save the human life. Any kind of hazard that affects the life cannot be allowed to remain. The existence of the dam without necessary assessment is a peril to the people residing in the affected locality and it is also a continuous threat to the environment.
6. As the grievance raised by the Petitioner pertains to apprehended cataclysm and unforeseen calamity to human life, it was directed that a copy of the petition to be served on the Union of India.
7. We have heard Mr. Manoj V. George, learned Counsel for the Petitioner, Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India alongwith Ms. Pinky Anand, learned Additional Solicitor General, for the Union of India, Mr. Subramonium Prasad, learned senior Counsel/AAG assisted by Mr. Umavathy, learned Counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu and Mr. Mohan V. Katarke alongwith Mr. G. Prakash, learned Counsel for the State of Kerala.
8. Mr. George, learned Counsel for the Petitioner has raised the following submissions in the course of his argument:
(i) Non-recording of the findings with regard to lifespan of the Mullaperiyar dam would invite a great man made disaster to the people of the locality and bring in ruination to the atmosphere.
(ii) It is the duty of the States as well as the Union of India to dispel and eliminate the fears from the marrows of the persons residing in the downstream areas of the dam.
(iii) It is imperative to have a separate disaster management plan for the said dam keeping in view the special features of the obtaining situation.
(iv) If the persons who remain in proximity of the dam or downstream are compelled to live in a state of constant fear, there is flagrant violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
9. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India has emphasised on paragraphs 229 and 230 of the judgment rendered by a five-Judge Bench in State of Tamil Nadu (supra). Relying on the same, it is submitted by him that a Committee has been constituted to keep a close watch on the safety and recommend measures which are necessary to be carried out by the State of Tamil Nadu and further, the Committee has been given the liberty to take appropriate steps and issue necessary directions to the two States, namely, Tamil Nadu and Kerala or any one of them, if so required, for the safety of the people residing in downstream areas in an emergent situation. He would submit that the command given in the last sentence of the paragraph 230(iii) is binding on all.
10. Keeping in view the rival submissions, we think it appropriate to reproduce paragraphs 229 and 230 from the State of Tamil Nadu (supra). They read thus:
229. However, to allay the apprehensions of Kerala-though none exists-about the safety of the Mullaperiyar dam on restoration of the FRL to 142 ft., a 3-Member Supervisory Committee is constituted. The Committee shall have one representative from the Central Water Commission and one representative each from the two States-Tamil Nadu and Kerala. The representative of the Central Water Commission shall be the Chairman of the Committee. The Committee will select the place for its office, which shall be provided by Kerala. Tamil Nadu shall bear the entire expenditure of the Committee.
230. The powers and functions of the Supervisory Committee shall be as follows:
(i) The Committee shall supervise the restoration of FRL in the Mullaperiyar dam to the elevation of 142 ft.
(ii) The Committee shall inspect the dam periodically, more particularly, immediately before the monsoon and during the monsoon and keep close watch on its safety and recommend measures which are necessary. Such measures shall be carried out by Tamil Nadu.
(iii) The Committee shall be free to take appropriate steps and issue necessary directions to the two States-Tamil Nadu and Kerala-or any of them if so required for the safety of the Mullaperiyar dam in an emergent situation. Such directions shall be obeyed by all concerned.
(iv) The Committee shall permit Tamil Nadu to carry out further precautionary measures that may become necessary upon its periodic inspection of the dam in accordance with the guidelines of the Central Water Commission and Dam Safety Organisation.