MANU/SC/0425/2012
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
IA No. ... of 2012 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 562 of 2009 (Under Article 32 of The Constitution of India)
Decided On: 11.05.2012
Appellants: Samaj Parivartan Samudaya and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: State of Karnataka and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.H. Kapadia, C.J.I., Aftab Alam and Swatanter Kumar, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Shyam Divan, (A.C.) Sr. Adv., A.D.N. Rao (A.C.), Siddhartha Chowdhury (A.C.), Prashant Bhushan, Anitha Shenoy, G.N. Reddy, Ankur S. Kulkarni, Shreekant N. Terdal, Kiran Suri, Gopal Jain, Rajat Jariwal, Advs. for Khaitan and Co., Sushil Balwada, Anil Kumar Mishra-I, Dinesh Kumar Garg, Meera Mathur, Advs. AP and J. Chambers, Balaji Srinivasan, Adv., Lawyer's Knit and Co., Rajesh Mahale, Munawwar Naseem, Rakesh K. Sharma, Advs., S. Narain and Co., Bhargava V. Desai, Avijit Bhushan, Aniruddha P. Mayee, E.C. Agrawala, Naveen R. Nath, Advs. for Parekh and Co., Shailesh Madiyal, Uttara Babbar and Snehasish Mukherjee, Advs.
Subject: Environment
Subject: Criminal
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 154; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 156(3); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 173; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 173(2); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 173(8); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 190; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 200; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 201, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 202, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 203, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 204, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 205, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 206, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 207, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 208, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 209, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 210, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 220; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 311; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 319; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 391; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 482; Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 32; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 120B; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 409; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 420; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 468; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 471
Relevant Section:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 173
Cases Referred:
T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad v. Union of India and Ors. W.P.(C) No. 202 of 1995; Gopal Das Sindhi and Ors. v. State of Assam and Anr. AIR 1961 SC 986; Mohd. Yusuf v. Smt. Afaq Jahan and Anr. MANU/SC/8888/2006 : AIR 2006 SC 705; Mona Panwar v. High Court of Judicature of Allahabad through its Registrar and Ors. MANU/SC/0087/2011 : (2011) 3 SCC 496; Hemant Dhasmana v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Anr. MANU/SC/0459/2001 : (2001) 7 SCC 536; Shri Bhagwan Samardha Sreepada Vallabha Venkata Vishwandha Maharaj v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0402/1999 : JT 1999 (4) SC 537; Sasi Thomas v. State and Ors. MANU/SC/8712/2006 : (2006) 12 SCC 421; Sakiri Vasu v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/8179/2007 : (2008) 2 SCC 409; Nirmal Singh Kahlon v. State of Punjab and Ors. MANU/SC/8189/2008 : (2009) 1 SCC 441; Vineet Narain and M.C. Mehta (Taj Corridor Scam) v. Union of India; Narmada Bai v. State of Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0371/2011 : (2011) 5 SCC 79; Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. State of Gujarat MANU/SC/0024/2010 : (2010) 2 SCC 200; Rama Chaudhary v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0517/2009 : (2009) 6 SCC 346; Hasanbhai Valibhai Qureshi v. State of Gujarat; National Human Rights Commission v. State of Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0713/2009 : (2009) 6 SCC 342; M.C. Mehta v. Union of India MANU/SC/0768/2009 : (2009) 6 SCC 142
Citing Reference:



Affirmed
  2

Mentioned
  2

Relied On
  12

Case Note:
Environment - Extension of Investigation - Section 173 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1873 (CrPC) - An application was filed by Petitioners of Petition No. 562 of 2011, to extend scope of investigation by CBI relating to illegal mining and other allied activities, within State of Karnataka - Petitioner also prayed that, both States should also be directed demarcate inter-state boundaries, particularly, in mining area - Disposal of recommendations made by Central Empowered Committee (CEC) in its report dated 20th April, 2012 - Whether, present was a fit case to be transferred to specialized investigating agency like CBI - Held, investigation of a case or filing chargesheet in a case did not by itself bring absolute end to exercise of power by investigating agency or by Court - Sometimes, investigating agency had to keep its options open to continue with investigation, as certain other relevant facts, incriminating materials and even persons, other than persons stated in FIR as Accused, might be involved in commission of crime - Basic purpose of an investigation was to bring out truth by conducting fair and proper investigation, in accordance with law and ensure that guilty were punished - CEC was not vested with any investigative powers under orders of this Court, or under relevant notifications, in manner as understood under CrPC - CEC was not conducting a regular inquiry or investigation with object of filing chargesheet as contemplated under Section 173 of CrPC - Their primary function and responsibility was to report to Court on various matters relating to collusion in illegal and irregular activities that were being carried on by various persons affecting ecology, environment and reserved forests of relevant areas - CEC had acted like a fact finding inquiry - CEC was not discharging quasi-judicial or even administrative functions, with a view to determine any rights of parties - It was not expected of CEC to give notice to companies involved in such illegalities or irregularities, as it was not determining any of their rights - It was simpliciter reporting matters to Court as per ground realities primarily with regard to environment and illegal mining for appropriate directions - It had made different recommendations with regard to prevention and prosecution of environmentally harmful and illegal activities carried on in collusion with government officers or otherwise - No prejudice had been caused to intervenor/affected parties by non-grant of opportunity of hearing by CEC - A suspect had no indefeasible right of being heard prior to initiation of investigation, particularly by investigating agency - In appropriate cases, Court was empowered to hand over investigation to an independent agency like CBI even when charge-sheet had been submitted - Report of CEC had brought new facts, subsequent events and unquestionable documents on record to substantiate its recommendations - Subsequent facts, inquiry and resultant suspicion, therefore, were circumstances for directing further and specialized investigation - Scope and ambit of present investigation was much wider than investigations/proceedings pending before Court/investigating agencies - Various acts and transactions prima facie appeared to be part of a same comprehensive transaction - Requirement of just, fair and proper investigation would demand investigation by a specialized agency keeping in view dimensions of transactions, extent of money involved and manipulations alleged - Present case required further investigation and was fit to be transferred to specialized investigating agency - Object of every investigation was to arrive at truth by conducting a fair, unbiased and proper investigation - There was no element of prejudice being caused to affected parties, if CBI was permitted to investigate entire matter - Direction of further investigation was based upon documents and facts brought to light by CEC as a result of examination conducted in course of its primary function relating to inquiry into environmental violations and illegal mining activity - It was ever and would always remain statutory obligation of State to prove offences against violators of law - If a private citizen had initiated proceedings before competent court, it would not absolve State of discharging its obligation under provisions of CrPC and obligations of Rule of Law - Court could not countenance an approach of this kind where State could be permitted to escape its liability only on ground that multifarious complaints or investigations had been initiated by private persons or bodies other than State - It enhanced primary and legal duty of State to ensure proper, fair and unbiased investigation - A complete failure of State machinery in relation to controlling and protecting environment, forests and minerals from being illegally mined and exploited - Wherever and whenever State failed to perform its duties, Court would step in to ensure that, Rule of Law prevailed over abuse of process of law - Such abuse might result from inaction or even arbitrary action of protecting true offenders or failure by different authorities in discharging statutory or legal obligations in consonance with procedural and penal statutes - Issues specified at point 1(a) and 1(b) of CEC Report dated 20th April, 2012, were referred for investigation by Central Bureau of Investigation - All proceedings in relation to these items, if pending before any Court, would remain stayed till further orders of this Court - CBI would complete its investigation and submit a Report to Court of competent jurisdiction with a copy of Report to be placed on file of this Court - Report submitted by CEC and documents annexed thereto would be treated as 'informant's information to investigating agency' by CBI - CBI would undertake investigation in a most fair, proper and unbiased manner uninfluenced by stature of persons and political or corporate clout, involved in present case - It would be open to CBI to examine and inspect records of any connected matter pending before any investigating agency or any Court - Competent authority would constitute special investigating team, headed by an officer not below rank of Additional Director General of Police/Additional Commissioner forthwith - Any investigation being conducted by any agency other than CBI would also not progress any further, restricted to items stated in Clause (a) above, except with leave of Court - CBI would complete its investigation uninfluenced by any order, inquiry or investigation that was pending on date of passing of this order
ORDER
Swatanter Kumar, J.
1. By this order we will deal with and dispose of, the recommendations made by the Central Empowered Committee (for short, 'CEC') in its report dated 20th April, 2012. Since we have heard the affected parties, the Petitioners and the learned Amicus Curiae, we shall summarize the contentions of the Learned Counsel for the respective parties. The Learned Counsel appearing for the affected parties contended:
a. CEC has submitted its report without providing them an opportunity of being heard.
b. CEC has exceeded its jurisdiction and enlarged the scope of the enquiry beyond the reference made by the Court. Thus, the Court should not accept any of the recommendations made by the CEC.
c. In relation to the alleged irregularities and illegalities pointed out in the report of the CEC, even where criminality is involved or criminal offences are suspected, the matters are sub judice before the Court of competent jurisdiction. Thus, this Court should not pass any orders for transferring the investigation of such offences to the Central Bureau of Investigation (for short 'CBI') as it would seriously prejudice their interests.
2. In order to deal with these contentions, it is necessary for this Court to briefly refer to the background of these cases, which has resulted in the filing of the unnumbered IA in Writ Petition No. 562/2009 and the peculiar facts and circumstances in which the CEC has made its recommendations.
3. Concerned with the rampant pilferage and illegal extraction of natural wealth and resources, particularly iron ore, and the environmental degradation and disaster that may result from unchecked intrusion into the forest areas, this Court felt compelled to intervene. Vide its order dated 9th September, 2002 in T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad v. Union of India and Ors. W.P.(C) No. 202 of 1995, this Court constituted the CEC to examine and monitor the various activities infringing the laws protecting the environment and also the preventive or punitive steps that may be required to be taken to protect the environment. In addition to this general concern for the environment, the order of this Court dated 9th September, 2002, this Court noted violations of its Orders and directed that the CEC shall monitor implementation of all orders of the Court and shall place before it any unresolved cases of non-compliance, including in respect of the encroachments, removals, implementations of working plans, compensatory afforestation, plantations and other conservation issues. In furtherance to the said order, the Government framed a notification in terms of Section 33 of the Environment Protection Act, 1996. The CEC constituted by this Court was proposed to be converted into a Statutory Committee. The draft notification for the same was also placed before this Court on 9th September, 2002. After approval, the Court directed that a formal notification will be issued within a week and the functions and responsibilities given to the CEC were to be exercised by the said Statutory Committee. In fact, this Notification was issued on 17th September, 2002.
4. It may be noticed here that, it was in furtherance to the order of the Government of Andhra Pradesh vide G.O.M No. 467, Home (SCA) Dept. dated 17th November, 2009, supplemented by Notification No. 228/61/2009-AVD-11 dated 1st December, 2009 issued by the Central Government, that the CBI was directed to register a case against the Obulapuram Mining Company (OMC). Earlier the CBI had registered a case against the OMC on 7th December, 2009 and started the probe. This probably came to be stayed by the High Court vide its order dated 12th December, 2009 which stay was vacated by another order of that Court on 16th December, 2010 paving the way for a full-fledged probe. As a result of vacation of the stay, the CBI continued its investigation.
5. The CBI also filed a charge-sheet in a special court against the OMC, in an illegal mining case falling within the State of Karnataka, charging the accused under Sections 120B, 409, 420, 468 and Section 471 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short 'Indian Penal Code') read with the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The case against the OMC for illegal mining was under investigation in respect of the areas of Obulapuram and Malangapudi villages of Anantpur district in the State of Andhra Pradesh and in the rest of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
6. Further, the State of Andhra Pradesh vide its G.O. Rt. No. 723 dated 25th November, 2009, issued by the Industrial and Commercial Department, suspended the mining operations and also the transportation of mineral material by OMC and even other implicated companies, on the basis of the findings of a High Level Committee, headed by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, Hyderabad and the Report of the CEC submitted to this Court in I.A. No. 2/2009 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 201 of 2009, a copy of which was forwarded to the State Government. This was challenged before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh which, vide judgment dated 26th February, 2010, set aside the notification and allowed the writ petitions, while holding that the G.O. issued by the Government suffered from a jurisdictional error and was in violation of the principles of natural justice. Against the said judgment of the High Court, the Government of Andhra Pradesh filed a Special Leave Petition, SLP(C) No. 7366-7367 of 2010 on different grounds.
7. Samaj Parivartan Samuday, a registered society, filed petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India stating that the illegal mining in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka was still going on in full swing. Such illegal mining and transportation of illegally mined minerals were being done in connivance with the officials, politicians and even Ministers of State. There was a complete lack of action on the part of the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the one hand and the States of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, on the other. It was averred that there was complete breakdown of the official machinery, thereby allowing such blatant illegalities to take place. This inaction and callousness on the part of the Central and the State Governments and failure on their part to control the illegal mining has allowed large-scale destruction, both of forest and non-forest lands and has adversely affected the livelihood of the people. It thus, has filed WP (C) 562 of 2009 and has prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ, order or direction to the respective State Governments and to the Union of India, to stop all mining and related activities in the forest areas of these two States. It further sought that the orders passed by this Court in the W.P.(C) No. 202 of 1995 be carried out and the provisions of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 be implemented. It also prayed for cancelling of the 'raising contracts' or sub-lease executed by the Government of Karnataka in favour of the various private individuals and allowing back-door entry into the mining activity in those areas. The most significant prayer in this petition was that after stopping of the mining activity, a systematic survey of both the inter-state border between the States of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka and mine lease areas along the border be conducted and proper Relief and Rehabilitation Programmes (for short 'RR Programmes') be implemented.
8. All the above cases, i.e., W.P.(C) No. 202/1995, 562/2009 and SLP(C) No. 7366-7367/2010, relate to protection of environment, forest areas, stoppage of illegal mining and cancellation of illegal sub-leasing and contracts executed by any State Government in favour of the third parties, to the extent such contracts are invalid and improper. The latter cases, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 562 of 2009 and SLP(C) Nos. 7366-7367 of 2010 concern the Bellary Forest Reserve. Further, there were serious allegations raised in these petitions as to how and the manner in which the leases were executed and mining permits were granted or renewed for carrying out the mining activities stated in the petition.
9. The CEC was required to submit quarterly reports, which it has been submitting and with the passage of time, large irregularities and illegalities coupled with criminality were brought to the notice of this Court. The CEC, in discharge of its functions and responsibilities, was examining the matters, in both the States of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. These violations have come to the surface as a result of enquiries conducted by the CEC, regarding illegal mining and mining beyond their leased areas by these companies. It was pointed by the CEC with specific reference to these companies that there was not only illegal extraction of iron ore but the minerals was being also extracted beyond the leased area specified in the lease deeds. Further, there was unchecked export of iron ore from the border areas of the two States, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka. This related to the quantum, quality and transportation of ore as well.
10. While passing an order of complete ban on mining activity in these areas vide order dated 29th July, 2011 this Court sought submissions on the market requirement for mined ore and vide order dated 5th August, 2011 permitted only M/s. National Minerals Development Corporation Ltd. (for short "NMDC") to carry out very limited mining activity, so that the economic interest of the country and of the states does not suffer irretrievably. This Court has also directed the CEC to examine all aspects of the mining activity and report on various measures that are required to be taken for RR Programmes. Limited mining activity, thus, was permitted to be carried on in the area with the clear direction that the RR Programmes shall be simultaneously commenced and it is only after such RR Programmes are satisfactorily put into motion and the CEC makes a suggestion in this regard, that the mining activity would be permitted. Vide order dated 23rd September, 2011, this Court accepted various recommendations of the CEC and noticed that prima facie it appears that at the relevant time, there existed linkage between the alleged illegal mining in the Bellary Reserve Forest, falling in the District Anantpur in Andhra Pradesh and the illegalities in respect of grant/renewal of mining leases and deviations from sanctioned mine sketch in the Bellary District in Karnataka. The Court also noted that illegally extracted iron ore belonging to one M/s. Associated Mining Company (for short "AMC") was apparently routed through the nearest Port in Vishakhapatnam, through district Anantpur in Andhra Pradesh. Thus, the Court felt that the CBI should examine the alleged illegalities. Vide the same order, this Court required the CBI to additionally present a status report of investigations which the CBI had undertaken in respect of OMC in Andhra Pradesh under FIR No. 17A/2009-CBI (Hyderabad). It was also reported that there was massive illegal mining by third parties in the mining lease No. 1111 of one M/s. National Minerals Development Corporation (NMDC). It was suspected that one M/s. Deccan Mining Syndicate (for short "DMS") was involved in such activities and no action had been taken on the complaints of NMDC. Some other directions were also issued including directions for further inquiry by the CEC and the CEC was required to put up a comprehensive report before this Court.
11. In the meanwhile, an application was filed by the Petitioners of writ petition No. 562 of 2009 which remained un-numbered. The prayer in this application was to extend the scope of investigation by the CBI relating to illegal mining and other allied activities which the politicians and major corporate groups including M/s. Jindal Group and M/s. Adanis were indulging in, within the State of Karnataka. They also prayed that both the States should also be directed demarcate the inter-state boundaries, particularly, in the mining area.
12. After examining the issues raised in the IA, the earlier orders of this Court and based on the meetings held by the CEC on 20th March, 2012 and 11th April, 2012, respectively, the CEC identified the issues as follows:
i) The alleged serious illegalities/ irregularities and undue favour in respect of (a) the land purchased by the close relatives of the then Chief Minister, Karnataka for 0.40 crore in the year 2006 and subsequently sold to M/s South West Mining Limited in the year 2010 for Rs. 20.00 crores and (b) donation of Rs. 20.00 crore received by Prerna Education Society from M/s South West Mining Limited.
ii) the alleged illegal export of iron ore from Belekeri Port and associated issues;
iii) alleged export from Krishapatnam and Chennai Port after exports were banned by the State of Karnataka; and
iv) transfer of senior police officers on deputation to Lokayukta, Karnataka.
13. The CEC filed two comprehensive reports before this Court, one dated 20th April, 2012 and other dated 27th April, 2012, both in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 562 of 2011.
14. Out of the above issues indicated, the CEC dealt with issue No. 1 in the Report dated 20th April, 2012, while issue Nos. 2 to 4 were dealt with in the Report dated 27th April, 2012. On issue No. 1, after summarizing the facts and its observations during its enquiry, the CEC pointed out illegalities, irregularities and instances of misuse of public office committed for the benefit of the close relatives of the then Chief Minister, State of Karnataka. It made the following recommendations:
15. Keeping in view the above facts and circumstances the CEC is of the considered view that the purchase of the above said land notified for acquisition for public purpose, its de-notification from acquisition, permission granted for conversion from agriculture to non-agricultural (residential) purpose and subsequent sale to M/s South West Mining Limited prima facie involves serious violations of the relevant Acts and procedural lapses and prima facie misuse of office by the then Chief Minister, Karnataka thereby enabling his close relatives to make windfall profits and raises grave issues relating to undue favour, ethics and morality. Considering the above and taking into consideration the massive illegalities and illegal mining which have been found to have taken place in Karnataka and the allegations made against the Jindal Group as being receipient of large quantities of illegally mined material and undue favour being shown to them in respect of the mining lease of M/s MML it is RECOMMENDED that a detailed investigation may be directed to be carried out in the matter by an independent investigating agency such as the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and to take follow up action. This agency may be asked to delve into the matter in depth and in a time bound manner. This agency may also be directed to investigate into other similar cases, if any, of lands de-notified from acquisition by the Bangalore Development Authority and the illegalities / irregularities / procedural lapses, if any, and to take follow up action.
16. The Prerna Education Society set up by the close relatives of the then Chief Minister, Karnataka has during March, 2010 vide two cheques of Rs. 5.0 crores each received a donation of Rs. 10 crores from M/s South West Mining Limited, a Jindal Group Company. In this context, it is of interest to note that during the year 2009-2010 the net profit (after tax) of the said Company was only Rs. 5,73 crores. Looking into the details of the other donations made by the said Company or by the other Jindal Group Companies to any other Trust / Society not owned, managed or controlled by the Jindal Group. After considering that a number of allegations, with supporting documents, have been made in the Report dated 27th July, 2011 of Karnataka Lokayukta regarding the M/s. JSW Steel Limited having received large quantities of illegal mineral and alleged undue favour shown to it in respect of the extraction / supply of iron ore by / to it from the mining lease of M/s MML, it is RECOMMENDED that this Hon'ble Court may consider directing the investigating agency such as CBI to also look into the linkages, if any, between the above said donation of Rs. 10 crores made by M/s South West Mining Limited and the alleged receipt of illegal mineral by M/s JSW Steel Limited and the alleged undue favour shown to it in respect of the mining lease of M/s MML.
17. The CEC has filed its Report dated 28th March, 2012 wherein the representation filed by the Petitioner against Mr. R. Parveen Chandra (ML 2661) has been dealt with (refer para 6(ii), page 11-13 of the CEC Report dated 28th March, 2012). In the said representation it has been alleged that Mr. Parveen Chandra the lessee of ML No. 2661 has made two payments, one of Rs. 2.50 crores to M/s Bhagat Homes Private Limited and the other of Rs. 3.5 crores to M/s Dhavalagir Property Developers Private Limited as a quid pro quo for allotment of the said mining lease. It is RECOMMENDED that this Hon'ble Court may consider directing the investigating agency such as CBI to investigate the payments made by the above said lessee to these two companies whose Directions / shareholders are the close relatives of the then Chief Minister, Karnataka and whether there was any link between such payments and grant of mining lease to Mr. Parveen Chandra."
15. When we heard the parties to the lis and even permitted the affected parties as interveners, the hearing had been restricted to the Report of the CEC dated 20th April, 2012. Therefore, presently, we are passing directions only in relation to that Report, while postponing the hearing of the second Report which is dated 27th April, 2012.
16. In the backdrop of the above events of the case, reference to certain relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Code of Criminal Procedure.) can now be appropriately made, before we proceed to deal with the above noticed contentions.
17. The machinery of criminal investigation is set into motion by the registration of a First Information Report (FIR), by the specified police officer of a jurisdictional police station or otherwise. The CBI, in terms of its manual has adopted a procedure of conducting limited pre-investigation inquiry as well. In both the cases, the registration of the FIR is essential. A police investigation may start with the registration of the FIR while in other cases (CBI, etc.), an inquiry may lead to the registration of an FIR and thereafter regular investigation may begin in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure places an obligation upon the authorities to register the FIR of the information received, relating to commission of a cognizable offence, whether such information is received orally or in writing by the officer in-charge of a police station. A police officer is authorised to investigate such cases without order of a Magistrate, though, in terms of Section 156(3) Code of Criminal Procedure the Magistrate empowered under Section 190 may direct the registration of a case and order the police authorities to conduct investigation, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Such an order of the Magistrate under Section 156(3) Code of Criminal Procedure is in the nature of a pre-emptory reminder or intimation to police, to exercise their plenary power of investigation under that Section. This would result in a police report under Section 173, whereafter the Magistrate may or may not take cognizance of the offence and proceed under Chapter XVI Code of Criminal Procedure. The Magistrate has judicial discretion, upon receipt of a complaint to take cognizance directly under Section 200 Code of Criminal Procedure, or to adopt the above procedure. [Ref. Gopal Das Sindhi and Ors. v. State of Assam and Anr. AIR 1961 SC 986; Mohd. Yusuf v. Smt. Afaq Jahan and Anr. MANU/SC/8888/2006 : AIR 2006 SC 705; and Mona Panwar v. High Court of Judicature of Allahabad through its Registrar and Ors. MANU/SC/0087/2011 : (2011) 3 SCC 496.
18. Once the investigation is conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a police officer is bound to file a report before the Court of competent jurisdiction, as contemplated under Section 173 Code of Criminal Procedure, upon which the Magistrate can proceed to try the offence, if the same were triable by such Court or commit the case to the Court of Sessions. It is significant to note that the provisions of Section 173(8) Code of Criminal Procedure open with non-obstante language that nothing in the provisions of Section 173(1) to 173(7) shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of an offence after a report under Sub-section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate. Thus, under Section 173(8), where charge-sheet has been filed, that Court also enjoys the jurisdiction to direct further investigation into the offence. {Ref., Hemant Dhasmana v. Central Bureau of Investigation and Anr. MANU/SC/0459/2001 : (2001) 7 SCC 536. This power cannot have any inhibition including such requirement as being obliged to hear the accused before any such direction is made.