MANU/SC/8245/2008
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 6515 of 2008 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15224 of 2007)
Decided On: 06.11.2008
Appellants: Siemens Public Communication Networks Pvt. Ltd. and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dr. Arijit Pasayat, C.K. Thakker and L.S. Panta, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Shyam Divan, Sr. Adv., Pradeep Kumar Bakshi, Rajat Navet and Madhur Yadav, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: B. Datta, A.S.G., Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Vinay Bhasin and Dushyant Dave, Sr. Advs., Rahul Gupta, Reema Sharma, Bhargava V. Desai, Ashok Kumar Srivastava, B. Krishna Prasad, N. Ganapathy, Tasneem Ahmadi, Gaurav Joshi, Sharifa Chaudhary and Sudhir Kumar Gupta, Advs.
Subject: Contract
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 226
Cases Referred:
Master Marine Services (P) Ltd. v. Hodgkinson (P) Ltd. and Anr. MANU/SC/0300/2005; Raunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R. Construction Ltd. MANU/SC/0770/1998; Sterling Computers Ltd. v. M.N.Publications Ltd. MANU/SC/0439/1993; Air India Ltd. v. Cochin International Airport Ltd. MANU/SC/0055/2000; B.S.N. Joshi and Sons Ltd. v. Nair Coal Services Ltd. MANU/SC/8598/2006; Reliance Airport Developers (P) Ltd. v. Airports Authority of India and Ors. MANU/SC/4912/2006; State of U.P. and Ors. v. Renusagar Power Co. and Ors. MANU/SC/0505/1988; Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service 1984 (3) All.ER.935; Commissioner of Income-tax v. Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. MANU/SC/0181/1983; Tata Cellular v. Union of India MANU/SC/0002/1996; R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex Brind; Asia Foundation & Construction Ltd. v. Trafalgar House Construction (I) Ltd. And Ors. MANU/SC/1028/1997; W.B. State Electricity Board v. Patel Engineering Co. Ltd. And Ors. MANU/SC/0024/2001; Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa and Ors. MANU/SC/0090/2007
Authorities Referred:
Grahame Aldous and John Alder, "Applications for Judicial Review, Law and Practice"
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the final Judgment and Order dated 10.8.2007 of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in W.P. (C) No. 1768 of 2007 (MANU/DE/9562/2007)
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  10

Mentioned
  4

Case Note:
Contract - Scope of Judicial Review - Respondent no. 2 nominated by respondent no. 1 for Indian Army's modernization plan for Technical Communication System - Tenders floated - Appellants wanted respondent No. 2 to award the tender in their favour being the lowest bidder out of the 3 technical qualified bidders and they were ousted by adding imaginary price to its bid which appellants never quoted - Stand of respondent no. 2 was that appellants price was not based on actual package cost to meet complete requirement of Request for Proposal while working out the actual package cost based on assumption of number of quantities and items which appellants ignored - Writ Petition dismissed by High Court on the ground that there was no scope for interference considering limited scope of judicial review particularly when no malafides alleged or pleaded - Hence present appeal - Held, modern trend points to judicial restraint in administrative action - Court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made - Court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative decision - If a review of the administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its own decision, without the necessary expertise, which itself may be fallible - The Government must have freedom of contract - Principle of judicial review cannot be denied so far as exercise of contractual powers of government bodies are concerned, but it is intended to prevent arbitrariness or favouritism and it is exercised in the larger public interest or if it is brought to the notice of the Court that in the matter of award of a contract power has been exercised for any collateral purpose - In international competitive bidding which postulates keen competition and high efficiency, the bidders should have assistance of technical experts because the degree of care required in such a bidding is greater than in ordinary local bids for small works - In instant case no separate quantities were furnished to vendors in respect of item no. 11 - All bidders were in same state - In the column "Quantity" against said item petitioners inserted the words "As Required", respondent no. 3 inserted the figure "1" and respondent no. 4 left the column blank - Unit price entered in the column "Unit Price" by each vendors - Commercial bids opened on 23rd January 2007 where all three successful vendors were called - Respondent no. 2 for first time declared quantity of Vehicular Mobile Terminals as 1200 in number - Bids became public on 23rd January 2007 - No question of changing/adding/altering/modifying the same by any of the parties - After opening of bids Expert Committee carried out comprehensive evaluation for arriving at lowest bidder - Composite price sheet indicated that appellant endorsed figure "1" in column of "Quantity" and while filling in the price in the column of "Unit Price Euro" as also "Total Price Euro", inserted the figure, "8,977.34" - Composite price statement at variance with original Bill of Materials submitted by appellant - No technical explanation was given by the appellant as to why the quantity had been changed by appellant No. 1 from "As required" to "1" while the "Unit Price" and "Total Price" was kept as the same in the composite price schedule - Committee multiplied the unit price furnished by appellant No. 1 with the figure 1200 to arrive at the total price, and the same method was uniformly adopted for the other two bidders - Respondent No. 2 cannot be faulted for strictly adhering to the rates furnished by appellant No. 1 in its original bid documents - If appellant No. 1 wanted to offer the price of one unit which as per its contention, was good to serve 100 users, then the same should have been so indicated in the Bill of Materials - Appellant No. 1 having quoted a rate on a unit basis in respect of item No. 11, respondent No. 2 had no option but to make the said rate the basis for arriving at the total price - Respondent No. 2 was under an obligation to not only maintain a great degree of transparency and fair dealing on its part, but was also expected to maintain the sanctity and integrity of the entire process - It was incumbent upon respondent No. 2 to ensure that no different yardstick were adopted for any of the vendors and at the same time, to ensure that there was not the remotest possibility of discrimination, arbitrariness or favouritism - Appellants have also not levelled any personal allegations of malafides or favouritism against respondent No. 2 - If the decision relating to award of contracts is bonafide and is in public interest, Courts will not exercise the power of judicial review and interfere even if there is a procedural lacuna - Appeal dismissed. [para 11, 18, 20, 22, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30,34, 36 ]
Ratio Decidendi:
If two views are possible and no malafides or arbitrariness is alleged or shown, there is no scope for interference with the view taken by the authorities in inviting tenders.
Case Category:
MATTERS RELATING TO LEASES, GOVT. CONTRACTS AND CONTRACTS BY LOCAL BODIES - TENDERS INVITED OR CONTRACTS AWARDED/LEASES GRANTED OR DETERMINED BY PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS
Industry: Telecom
JUDGMENT
Arijit Pasayat, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a Division Bench of the Delhi High Court dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellants. In the writ petition they had inter alia prayed for issuance of directions to the respondents 1 and 2 to award the contract in respect of tender No. DRTS/AREN/Jan-2005 floated by Bharat Electronics Limited-respondent No. 2 on behalf of Union of India-respondent No. 1 in favour of appellant No. 1. They further prayed for directions to restrain respondents 1 and 2 from negotiating with any other bidder except appellant No. 1 on the ground that it is the lowest bidder of the said tender.
3. The factual position in a nutshell is as follows.
Respondent No. 2, Bharat Electronics Ltd. was nominated by respondent No. 1, Ministry of Defence, Government of India, as the prime contractor for Indian Army's modernization plan for Technical Communication System (in short the `TCS'). Respondent No. 2 floated a Request for Proposal (RFP) for procurement of Digital Radio Trunking System (in short the `DRTS'), also popularly known as Terrestrial Trunked Radio (in short the `TETRA') which is a major component in the TCS Programme of the Indian Army, vide Tender No. DRTS/AREN/Jan-2005. In the RFP floated by respondent No. 2 for the DRTS, the vendors were called upon to make firm technical and commercial proposals for the supply and transfer of technology of DRTS to respondent No. 2 for incorporating in their solution to Indian Army. It was specified that the commercial offers should be for quantities of 80 systems as per Bill of Material enclosed with RFP.
The technical specifications detailed the components of the DRTS by splitting them into 9 sub-systems. The tender also stipulated that the licensed manufacture of DRTS shall be undertaken by respondent No. 2 through a Transfer of Technology (in short the `ToT') for both hardware and software by executing a ToT Agreement between the vendor and respondent No. 2.
In terms of the tender document, the evaluation, trials and completion of the contract was proposed to be carried out in five phases spread over a period of time. Phase-I comprised a Preliminary Evaluation of Vendor Proposal and technical analysis, including presentations to be made by the vendors as also clarifications to be provided on questions raised during the presentations and subsequent analysis to the Technical Evaluation Committee (in short the `TEC') for being shortlisted for the Phase-II evaluations. Phase-II evaluations comprised the visits of the empowered technical team to assess the vendor system at the vendor premises to assess the technical capability, encryption, implementation, confirmation of essential parameters and suitability of equipment as per RFP, demonstration of system capability, mock up installation at the location of the vendors and vendors found qualified by the above criteria were to be shortlisted for Phase-III evaluation.
Phase-III evaluation required the vendors to offer three systems for user trials; one of them was to be installed in a shelter provided by respondent No. 2, which was to be followed by user trials to be conducted by an evaluation team from the Indian Army. The vendors were also required to give a written undertaking that their systems will meet all the requirements of technical and environmental evaluations, maintainability evaluation trials etc. to be conducted in Phase-V.
Phase-IV comprised opening of the commercial offers of such of the vendors whose systems were shortlisted after Phase-III by a Committee in the presence of the tenderers and further negotiations were to be made only with the lowest bidder (L1) as determined by the Committee. Final Phase-V came into play after placement of order when the successful tenderer was required to supply the three systems.
On 8th February, 2005, a pre-bid meeting was held by respondent No. 2 where the prospective bidders were apprised of the contents and basic requirements of the tender. In March 2005, eight bidders, including appellant No. 1 submitted their bids in response to the RFP. Phase-I evaluation was carried out by the TEC which shortlisted six bidders for Phase-II evaluation. Phase-II evaluation was carried by the Empowered Technical Committee (in short the `ETC'), which after visiting the factory sites of the six qualified bidders, including appellant No. 1 recommended three vendors, namely, petitioner No. 1, respondent No. 3 (/M/s. Selex Communications SpA (M/s. Selex) and M/s. Thales Land & Joint Systems (M/s. Thales) for Phase-III evaluation. In Phase-III evaluation, field trials, maintainability evaluation trials, EMI/EMC testing and discussions on feasibility etc. were held and further evaluation trials were carried out. After approval of the Technical Committee's report, all the three bidders as referred to hereinabove, qualified for Phase-IV evaluation and clearance was accorded for the next phase of evaluation. In Phase-IV, commercial bids were opened on 23rd January, 2007 in the presence of the representatives of all three bidders and the prices of the main items as per their commercial bids were read out. The total price of the three bidders worked out as under:
(i) M/s. Siemens (appellant No. 1) 16,100,969 Euros
(ii) M/s. Selex (Respondent No. 3) 25,775,048 Euros
(iii) M/s. Thales(Respondent No .4) 22,781,769 Euros
However, as the proposals of the bidders comprised various details contained in the enclosures to the bid, they were informed that a comprehensive evaluation would be carried out by the Expert Committee for arriving at L1 bidder and that any further interaction would only be held with L1 bidders. An Evaluation Committee was constituted and the bids of the said three bidders were analyzed. By letter dated 1st February, 2007, the Evaluation Committee asked for certain clarifications in the form of queries from all the three bidders including appellant No. 1. In the meeting dated 7th February, 2007 with the said three bidders they gave their clarifications to the queries raised by respondents No. 1 and 2. As a result, the Evaluation Committee completed its evaluation of the bids of the said three bidders and on 10th February, 2007 finalized the total package cost for each of the three bidders working out a comparative statement containing the details as per the scope of the RFP.
According to appellants, since respondent No. 2 was not announcing the name of L-1 tenderer, they wrote to the respondents on 16.2.2007 inter alia stating that though the price bid had been opened more than three weeks back the name of L-1 had not yet been announced. On the basis of read out price of all the three bidders on 23.1.2007, the appellant No. 1 had emerged as the lowest bidder and was, therefore, entitled to be intimated the results of the tender. Grievance was made that they did not get any response from the respondent No. 2 and, therefore, they sent a reminder on 22.2.2007. Finally, by letter dated 23.2.2007 a response was received from respondent No. 2 acknowledging their representation but the outcome of the tender was not intimated. Therefore, the writ petition was filed. The prayers, as set out in the writ petition have been noted above. In essence the appellants wanted respondent No. 2 to award the tender in their favour being the lowest bidder. Counter-affidavits were filed. During the course of the hearing of the writ petition, a preliminary objection was raised regarding non-impleadment of two other bidders and they were impleaded on the oral request of the appellants.
Stand of respondent No. 2 was that the writ petitioner's price is not based on the actual package cost to meet the complete requirement of RFP, in view of the short falls while working out the actual package cost based on the assumption of number of quantities and items which the writ petitioners had ignored and the details were given in Annexure R-5.
It was stated that the Evaluation Committee has not violated any norms while preparing the report and holding M/s. Selex as L-1 bidders .
It was further stated that conditions of the tender were not violated and all the guidelines as per CVC were followed scrupulously while arriving at a package price considering the complete requirement of RFP and there is no genuine grievance of the writ petitioners giving rise to any cause of action in their favour. The writ petitioner has indulged in deliberate distortion and contortion of facts and misrepresented the settled law in this regard.
5. The appellants disputed the above position and it was stated that the appellant No. 1's bid was the lowest of the 3 technical qualified bidders whose commercial bids were opened and appellant No. 1 was being ousted by adding an imaginary price of EU 11 billion to its bid, which the appellants never quoted and addition to its bid was unwarranted and amounted to artificially loading the bid. It was in essence stated that so far as Item No. 11 is concerned, a wrong view was taken on the basis of absurd reasoning. The addition of EU 11 billion to the bid of the appellants on account of Item No. 11 has resulted in increasing its total bid to EU 28 billion which, on the face of it, is absurd.
6. Further the stand of respondent No. 2 was that the appellants could have sought necessary clarification in this regard, as was done by them in the case of other issues raised on 7.2.2007.
7. In the course of arguments the appellants stated that they were willing to provide software for 1200 users for the price quoted in the bid, i.e., for EU 8977.34. The respondents, as noted above, disputed the factual scenario as narrated by the appellants and they specifically stated that different stands have been taken at different points of time by the writ petitioners to suit their own purpose. Therefore, there was no scope for interference considering the limited scope of judicial review, particularly when, no malafides have been alleged or pleaded. The High Court by the impugned judgment dismissed the writ petition.
8. In support of the appeal, stands taken before the High Court were reiterated. With reference to the figures indicated in the bid documents, it was submitted that a confusion was being created about the nature of the bid. It was clearly the intention of the appellants to indicate the price for 100 units. The unit base is 1 for 100 and that is how the appellants have understood the matter and had accordingly put the figure. It was submitted that there is a great price variation and in the greater public interest the bid offered by the appellants should be accepted and even they are willing to supply 1200 units at the price quoted for 1 unit, i.e., EU 8977.34.
9. Learned Counsel for the respondents on the other hand submitted that the appellants with their eyes open had quoted the figures and at different points of time have taken totally varying stands. Initially, they had stated the quantity to be "as required" and the unit price in EU to be 8977.34. The total price was left blank. At that point of time the quantity was not known and that a similar indication was made by each of the bidders. All the bidders understood the required quantity to be 1200. Interestingly the appellants had indicated the quantity to be 1 and had quoted the total price at EU 8977.34. They further submitted that the High Court rightly noted that had the respondent No. 2 proceeded on the basis of the rates furnished by the appellants in the composite bid schedule in the column (total price EU). Nothing could have precluded the appellants from turning around later on, and seeking to bind respondent No. 2 down to the rates as offered by it for a single unit in the original, the same being part of the original tender documents. It is also submitted that the variation in figures is not exorbitantly high, as is being projected by the appellants.
10. It would be appropriate to first deal with the scope of power of judicial review, more particularly, in the matter of tenders before we take note of various conclusions arrived at by the High Court.
11. In Master Marine Services (P) Ltd. v. Hodgkinson (P) Ltd. and Anr. MANU/SC/0300/2005 : AIR2005SC2299 , it was observed as follows:
11. The principles which have to be applied in judicial review of administrative decisions, especially those relating to acceptance of tender and award of contract, have been considered in great detail by a three-Judge Bench in Tata Cellular v. Union of India MANU/SC/0002/1996 : AIR1996SC11 . It was observed that the principles of judicial review would apply to the exercise of contractual powers by Government bodies in order to prevent arbitrariness or favouritism. However, it must be clearly stated that there are inherent limitations in exercise of that power of judicial review. Government is the guardian of the finances of the State. It is expected to protect the financial interest of the State. The right to refuse the lowest or any other tender is always available to the Government. But, the principles laid down in Article 14 of the Constitution have to be kept in view while accepting or refusing a tender. There can be no question of infringement of Article 14 if the Government tries to get the best person or the best quotation. The right to choose cannot be considered to be an arbitrary power. Of course, if the said power is exercised of that power will be struck down.
After an exhaustive consideration of a large number of decisions and standard books on Administrative Law, the Court enunciated the principle that the modern trend points to judicial restraint in administrative action. The Court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in which the decision was made. The Court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative decision. If a review of the administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its own decision, without the necessary expertise, which itself may be fallible. The Government must have freedom of contract. In other words, a fairplay in the joints is a necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere. However, the decision must not only be tested by the application of Wednesbury principles of reasonableness but must be free from arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides. It was also pointed out that quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative burden on the administration and lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure.