MANU/SC/0374/2016
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 3608 of 2016 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 1490 of 2015), Civil Appeal No. 3609 of 2016 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 1840 of 2015) and Civil Appeal No. 3610 of 2016 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 1914 of 2015)
Decided On: 08.04.2016
Appellants:State of Kerala and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:Kerala Rare Earth and Minerals Limited and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
T.S. Thakur, C.J.I., V. Gopala Gowda and R. Banumathi, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Mohan Parasaran, Sr. Adv. and Jogy Scaria, Adv.
For Respondents/Defendant: Shyam Divan, Sr. Adv., Ritin Rai, Gopinath Menon, Siddhartha Jha, V.K. Monga and Jayant Malik, Advs.
Subject: Mines and Minerals
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 11
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 2, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 3, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 4, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 4(1), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 5, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 5(1), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 6, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 7, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 8, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 9, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 10, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 10(3), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 11, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 11(2), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 11(5), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 12, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 13, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 13A, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 13(2), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 14, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 15, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 17, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 17A, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 17A(1A), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 17A(2), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 17A(2A), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 17A(2B), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 18, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 30; Government of India Act, 1935 [Repealed];Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 - Rule 59; Atomic Energy Act, 1962;Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950;Constitution of India - Article 39, Constitution of India - Article 48A, Constitution of India - Article 246, Constitution of India - Article 246(1), Constitution of India - Article 298
Cases Referred:
Shibu v. Tahsildar 1993 (2) KLT 870; Gem Granites v. State of Kerala and Ors. MANU/KE/0150/2006 : 2006 (2) KLT 899; Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa MANU/SC/0037/1960 : AIR 1961 SC 459; India Cement Ltd. v. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0226/1989 : (1990) 1 SCC 12; Orissa Cement Ltd. v. State of Orissa MANU/SC/0381/1991 : 1991 Supp (1) SCC 430; State of Orissa v. Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. MANU/SC/0361/1995 : 1995 Supp (2) SCC 686; Saurashtra Cement and Chemical Industries Ltd. and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. (2001) 1 SCC 91; State of Madhya Pradesh v. Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills Ltd. MANU/SC/0440/1995 : 1995 Supp(1) SCC 642; Monnet Ispat and Energy Limited v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0601/2012 : 2012 (11) SCC 1; Commissioner of Income Tax, Mumbai v. Anjum M.H. Ghaswala and Ors. MANU/SC/0662/2001 : (2002) 1 SCC 633; Captain Sube Singh and Ors. v. Lt. Governor of Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0442/2004 : (2004) 6 SCC 440; State of U.P. v. Singhara Singh MANU/SC/0082/1963 : AIR 1964 SC 358; Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner MANU/SC/0209/1977 : (1978) 1 SCC 405; Sandur Manganese and Iron Ores Ltd. v. State of Karnataka and Ors. MANU/SC/0695/2010 : (2010) 13 SCC 1; Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0742/1990 : (1990) 4 SCC 557; Amritlal Nathubhai Shah and Ors. v. Union Government of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0037/1976 : (1976) 4 SCC 108; State of Orissa and Anr. v. M.A. Tulloch and Co. MANU/SC/0021/1963 : AIR 1964 SC 1284; M.P. Ram Mohan Raja v. State of T.N. and Ors. MANU/SC/7343/2007 : (2007) 9 SCC 78; State of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone and Ors. MANU/SC/0394/1981 : (1981) 2 SCC 205; Dharambir Singh v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/1296/1996 : (1996) 6 SCC 702; Baijnath Kadio Case MANU/SC/0352/1969 : (1969) 3 SCC 838; Pallava Granite Industries (India) (P) Ltd. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8670/2006 : (2007) 15 SCC 30; Indian Charge Chrome Ltd. and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8759/2006 : (2006) 12 SCC 331; Waman Rao Case MANU/SC/0091/1980 : (1981) 2 SCC 362; Indian Metals and Ferro Alloys Ltd. Case MANU/SC/0197/1991 : 1992 suppl. (1) SCC 91; Dharam Chand Jain v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0066/1976 : (1976) 4 SCC 427; Union of India v. Madras Bar Assn. MANU/SC/0378/2010 : (2010) 11 SCC 1
Case Category:
MINES, MINERALS AND MINING LEASES
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judment and Order dated 13.11.2014 of the High Court of Kerla at Ernakulam in Writ Appeal No. 1610 of 2014 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 34345 of 2010 (MANU/KE/2248/2014)
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  8

Mentioned
  4

Relied On
  16

Case Note:
Mines and Minerals - Ownership in mineral reserves - Right to decline mining lease - By an order, Government of Kerala sanctioned grant - Mining lease for Ilmenite, Rutile, Leucoxene, etc - Period of 20 years - Order came in exercise of powers vested in State Government - Section 11(5) Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Preceded by approval of Government of India - Shortly after issue of sanction order - State Government by another order stayed further action - Ground - Detailed study on environmental impact of proposed leases needs to be undertaken - Before taking any further steps - Followed by nine letters addressed to Respondent-company - Stated that Government of Kerala did not consider it necessary to grant mining lease for mineral sand to private parties - Aggrieved, Respondents filed nine revision applications - Under Section 30 of Act - Revision applications were allowed by prescribed revisional authority - Common order setting aside impugned orders and remanding matters to State Government to reconsider the cases - Light of observations made in order passed by revisional authority - Upon remand - Government of Kerala once again examined the matter - By an order rejected all applications filed by the Respondents - Ground - Although as per Entry 54 List-I (Union List), Schedule VII , Parliament is competent to make laws - Regulation of mines and mineral development - Yet power of granting mining lease for mining minerals vested only in state government - Section 10 of the Act - State Government took the view - It had the power and control over the minerals lying in the land within its territory - It was entitled to safeguard the same in larger public interest - Formulating a suitable policy on the subject - Government declared - As owner of minerals lying in the land within its territorial limits - It was entitled to determine in public interest - Mining and exploitation of minerals will be permitted only through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings - State Government insisted such a policy not contrary to Act - Neither Constitutionally infirm - Aggrieved, Respondent-company filed writ petitions before High Court - Prayed for writ of mandamus directing State to implement revisional order - Issued by Government of India - Grant mining lease in favour of Respondent company - Respondents also prayed for declaration to effect - Order passed by Central Government in exercise of its powers Under Section 30 - Binding upon State Government - Any policy decision by State government contrary to said decision will not affect the rights of the Respondents - Learned Single Judge allowed writ petitions in part - Order passed by State Government was quashed - Matter remitted back to Government to pass orders - In light of observations made by the High Court - High Court quashed order by which further action in matter was stayed by the Government - Direction to Government to consider applications pending with it in accordance with law - High Court took the view - State Government had not reserved areas covered by applications - In terms of Section 17A(2) of 1957 Act - Filed by Respondents and that so long as no such reservation was made - Direction issued by Central Government to reconsider applications could not be negated - High Court also held - State Government had overlooked provisions of National Mineral Policy, 2008 - Policy permitted facilitation of private entrepreneurs - Since Government of Kerala had already exercised discretion - In terms of prevalent Mining Policy - Recommended to Government of India - Grant of approval for mining leases - Rejection of applications on basis of a changed policy - After Government of India had accorded sanction for proposed mining leases was unjustified - High Court also took note of the fact - Government of Kerala had granted mining lease - Respect of area covered by four other applications - There could not be different policies in respect of different areas - Covered by different applications made by same company - Aggrieved, State Government preferred writ appeals - Division Bench vide impugned order held - State Government not justified in declining mining lease - Ground - It had been simply directed to reconsider the matter - Refusal of Government amounted to institutional subordination - Appeals were accordingly dismissed - Observed that State Government's role in issuing sanction was minimal - Subject matter of law fell within domain of Central Government - Present appeals by special leave - Questions correctness of above order - Whether the ownership in the mineral reserves is vested in State Government - Whether the Government has the right to decline leases on ground that minerals or the areas where the same are found have been reserved for exploitation by government companies or corporations

Facts:

By an order the Government of Kerala sanctioned the grant of mining leases for Ilmenite, Rutile, Leucoxene, Zircon and Sillimanite (non-scheduled mineral) for a period of 20 years. The order came in exercise of the powers vested in the State Government Under Section 11(5) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and was preceded by the approval of the Government of India in terms of Section 5(1) thereof. Shortly after the issue of the sanction order, however, the State Government by another order stayed further action in the matter on the ground that a detailed study on the environmental impact of the proposed leases need be undertaken before taking any further steps. This was followed by nine letters addressed to the Respondent-company stating in no uncertain terms that the Government of Kerala did not consider it necessary to grant mining leases for mineral sand to private parties. Aggrieved by the said letters and communications, the Respondents filed nine revision applications Under Section 30 of the Act aforementioned before the Government of India. These revision applications were heard and allowed by the prescribed revisional authority by a common order setting aside the impugned orders and remanding the matters to the State Government to reconsider the cases in the light of the observations made in the order passed by the revisional authority.

Upon remand, the Government of Kerala once again examined the matter and by an order rejected all the applications filed by the Respondents on the ground that although, as per Entry 54 List-I (Union List), Schedule VII of the Constitution of India, the Parliament is competent to make laws for Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent such Regulation and development is declared by the Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest, yet, the power of granting mining leases for mining minerals vested only in the State Government Under Section 10 of the Act aforementioned. The Government referred to and relied upon its own industrial policy of 2007 according to which mining and exploitation of minerals were permissible only through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings in order to restrict indiscriminate mining and exploitations of minerals having regard in particular to the geographical and ecological conditions as well as the density of the population in the State of Kerala.

The State Government took the view that it had the power and control over the minerals lying in the land within its territory and that it was entitled to safeguard the same in larger public interest by formulating suitable policies on the subject. Relying upon the decisions of the High Court of Kerala in Shibu v. Tahsildar and Gem Granites v. State of Kerala and Ors. the Government declared that as the owner of the minerals lying in the land within its territorial limits it was entitled to determine in public interest that mining and exploitation of minerals will be permitted only through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings. The State Government insisted that such a policy was not contrary to the Act nor did it suffer from any constitutional infirmity. It also relied upon the fact that minerals in question were categorised as Atomic Minerals as per Part-B of the First Schedule to the Act aforementioned. The Government declared that environmental protection being one of its constitutional mandates, any decision that may affect environment or Sections of people living in the coastal areas or which may affect environmental conditions in those areas cannot be said to be in public interest.

Aggrieved by the order passed by the State Government, the Respondent-company filed Writ Petitions before the High Court of Kerala inter alia praying for a writ of mandamus directing the State to implement the revisional order issued by the Government of India and grant in favour of the Respondents mining leases in respect of all the areas which were the subject matter of the said order. The Respondents also prayed for a declaration to the effect that the order passed by the Central Government in exercise of its powers Under Section 30 of the Act aforementioned was binding upon the State Government and that any policy decision by the State Government contrary to the said decision will not affect the rights of the Respondents to obtain mining leases for the areas applied for. The Respondent also prayed for a mandamus directing the State Government to forward to the Government of India for approval all the mining lease applications made by the Respondent-Company which had not so far been forwarded for such approval.

The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petitions in part inasmuch as the order passed by the State Government was quashed and the matter remitted back to the Government to pass orders in the light of the observations made by the High Court. The High Court quashed the order by which further action in the matter was stayed by the Government with a direction to the Government to consider the applications pending with it in accordance with law. The High Court took the view that the State Government had not reserved, in terms of Section 17A(2) of the 1957 Act, the areas covered by the applications filed by the Respondents and that so long as no such reservation was made, the direction issued by the Central Government to the State Government to reconsider the applications could not be negated.

The High Court also held that the State Government had overlooked the provisions of the National Mineral Policy, 2008, which permitted facilitation of private entrepreneurs and that since the Government of Kerala had already exercised its discretion in terms of the prevalent Mining Policy and recommended to the Government of India the grant of approval for mining leases, the rejection of the applications on the basis of a changed policy after the Government of India had accorded sanction for the proposed mining leases was unjustified. The High Court also took note of the fact that Government of Kerala had granted mining lease in respect of the area covered by four other applications and that there could not be different policies in respect of different areas covered by different applications made by the same Company.

Aggrieved by the order passed by the Single Judge, the State Government preferred Writ Appeals which were heard and dismissed by a Division Bench of that Court in terms of the order impugned in the present appeals. The High Court, while doing so, held that the State Government was not justified in declining mining leases on the ground that it had been simply directed to reconsider the matter. The refusal of the Government, according to the High Court, amounted to institutional insubordination. The appeals were accordingly dismissed with the observation that the State Government's role in issuing the sanction was minimal, as the subject matter of the law fell within the domain of Central Government. The present appeals by special leave question the correctness of the above order, as already noted above.

Held

The Court was not, in the present case, dealing with a challenge to the levy of any tax, fee, cess or royalty nor is the vires of any legislation enacted by the State under challenge before it. It was, instead, examining whether the State Government was justified in declining the applications for grant of leases in favour of the Respondent-company on the ground that the mineral wealth found in the coastal regions of the State was vested in the State Government and that it was in exercise of its right of ownership over the said deposits entitled to reserve in its own favour or in favour of State owned companies or corporations the right to exploit such deposits. The State Government as noticed in the earlier part of the judgment has, while declining applications for grant of lease, relied upon its own policy according to which the mineral deposits in question are reserved for exploitation by a State agency only.[9]

It would thus appear that for the minerals in question there was no reservation made in favour of any State owned corporation or agency. That is perhaps the reason why the Government of India had granted approval to the State Governments recommendations on some of the applications filed by the Respondents. The State Government Policy, however, runs contrary to the National Mineral Policy, 2008 formulated by the Government of India, Ministry of Mines, in so far as it does not permit a mining lease in favour of any entity other than a State owned corporation or agency.[12]

There is no gainsaying that the State Government can reserve any area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease for undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it, but, in terms of Sub-section(2) of Section 17A where the Government proposes to do so, it shall by notification in the official gazette specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such areas will be reserved.[14]

Mr. Parasaran, learned senior Counsel for the Appellant, was unable to show the Court any notification issued by the Government Under Section 17A (2) nor was it possible for him to exalt the State's industrial policy to the status of a statutory reservation within the contemplation of Section 17A. The net result, therefore, is that while the power to reserve an area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease is squarely and specifically vested in the State Government, the exercise of that power is not demonstrable in the case at hand. It is common ground that there is no approval of the Central Government nor is there a notification duly published in the official gazette specifying boundaries of the reserved area and mineral or minerals in respect of which such area will be or has been reserved.[15]

It is well settled that if the law requires a particular thing to be done in a particular manner, then, in order to be valid the act must be done in the prescribed manner alone. Absence of the Central Government's approval to reservation and a notification as required by Section 17A, therefore, renders the State Government's claim of reservation untenable till such time a valid reservation is made in accordance with law. It is trite that the State Government's general executive power cannot be invoked to make a reservation dehors Section 17A.[16]

The upshot of the above discussion then is that while the State Government is the owner of the mineral deposits in the lands which vest in the Government as is the position in the case at hand, the Parliament has by reason of the declaration made in Section 2 of the 1957 Act acquired complete dominion over the legislative field covered by the said legislation. The Act does not denude the State of the ownership of the minerals situate within its territories but there is no manner of doubt that it regulates to the extent set out in the provisions of the Act the development of mines and minerals in the country. It follows that if the State Government proposes to reserve any area for exploitation by the State owned corporation or company, it must resort to making of such reservation in terms of Section 17A with the approval of the Central Government and by a notification specifying boundaries of the area and mineral or minerals in respect of which such areas will be reserved.[17]

Inasmuch as the State Government have not so far issued any notification in terms of Section 17A, the Industrial Policy-2007 of the Kerala State Government does not have the effect of making a valid reservation within the comprehension of Section 17A. The High Court was, therefore, justified in holding that there is no valid reservation as at present no matter the government can make such a reservation if so advised in the manner prescribed by law. In other words, the dismissal of this appeal shall not prevent the State from invoking its right Under Section 17(A)(2) of the Act by issuing notification in respect of the mineral deposits in question. There is, in that view, no reason for the Court to interfere with the judgment and order passed by the High Court. These appeals accordingly fail and are hereby dismissed, but in the circumstances without any order as to costs.[17]

In view of the majority of opinion, these appeals fail and are hereby dismissed.[61]

Minority opinion

In the federal structure of India, State Governments are the owners of the mines and minerals located within the territory of the State concerned. Although, mineral wealth vests with the State Government, yet the subject of Regulation of mines and mineral development is covered under Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. By a reading of Entry 23 of List II, it is clear that Entry 23 is subject to the provisions of List I with respect to Regulation and development of mines and mineral development under the control of the Union. Section 2 of the Act makes a declaration that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the Regulation of mines and the development of minerals to the extent provided in the said Act. It will therefore be seen, to the extent control of Regulation of mines and mineral development is taken over by the Union under the law made by Parliament declaring that it is expedient in the public interest to do so, the scope and ambit of Entry 23 of List II is cut down to that extent. This would appear to be clear on a plain construction of Entry 54 of List I and Entry 23 of List II.[24] and[25]

The policy of the State and impugned order of the State dated 15.12.2010 which state that the exploitation of the beach sand mineral would be done by the Public Sector Undertakings has to be examined in the light of the provision of the MMDR Act 1957 and MC Rules 1960. MMDR Act 1957 was enacted to provide for the Regulation of mines and oil fields and for the development of the minerals. The declaration contained in Section 2 of MMDR Act speaks of taking under the control of the Union the Regulation of mines and the development of minerals to the extent provided in the MMDR Act. In Section 3, the words "Minerals", "Mineral Oils", "Minor Minerals" have been separately defined. The MMDR Act, 1957 mainly deals with general restrictions on prospecting and mining operations and the Rules and procedures for regulating grants of prospecting licences and mining leases. State Governments are competent to give licences for prospecting and for granting mining leases. The Act specifically provides that in the case of minerals included in the First Schedule to the Act, the State Governments shall not grant or renew, prospecting licences or mining leases without the prior permission of the Union Government.[27]

State Government's ownership in mines and minerals in its territory and power of the State to grant or refuse application for mining on the ground that the land in question is not available in view of reservation of area by the State for exploitation of the minerals resources in the public sector whether permissible under MMDR Act: In grant of mining lease of a property of the State, the State Government has the discretion to grant or refuse to grant any prospective licence or licence to any applicant. No applicant has a right, much less vested right, to the grant of mining lease for mining operations in any place within the State. No one has a vested right for grant of mining lease. The State has a discretion to grant or refuse to grant any mining lease. No person can claim any right in any land belonging to the Government or in any mines except the rights created under MMDR Act and the Mineral Concession Rules. But State Government being a public authority, its acts are necessarily regulated by Rules and Regulations.[29]

The authority of the State to make reservation of a particular mining area within its territory for its own use is the offspring of the State's authority of ownership over the mines and minerals. Section 17A(2) reserves the power of the State Government with the approval of the Central Government to reserve any area not already held under prospecting licence or mining lease. Section 17A(2) uses the words "with the approval of the Central Government" and does not use the expression "prior approval".[33]

Since the source of the executive power of the State Government is Article 298 of the Constitution of India, it is clear from the proviso to Article 298 that the exercise of this executive power would be subject to legislation by Parliament. The declaration made in Section 2 of the MMDR Act has resulted in bringing the entire field of Regulation of mines and development of minerals under the control of the Union to the extent provided in the Act. Therefore, to determine the power of the State that is left within Entry 23 of List II, the learned Judge had to work it within the terms of the MMDR Act and MC Rules. The learned judge though it must to consider whether there is anything in the MMDR Act or MC Rules which takes away the executive power of the State Government or in any manner controls or regulates it. If there is any such provision in the Act or in MC Rules, then the same would prevail and the executive power of the State Government would have to give way to it. Under Section 17A (2) of the MMDR Act, when State has the competence to reserve any area for exploitation of minerals by public sector undertakings, the policy of the State of Kerala reserving exploitation of beach sand minerals by public sector undertakings cannot be said to be in derogation of the provisions of MMDR Act.[36]

Under Section 17A(2) the power is conferred upon the State Government with the approval of the Central Government to reserve any area for undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a government company or a corporation owned or controlled by it. The State Government has the executive power to exploit its own minerals. Such power is thus conferred upon the State by the MMDR Act itself. Section 17A (2) clearly recognizes the power of the State Government to reserve the land for mining or exploitation of the mineral in public sector. While so, it is difficult to comprehend as to how a policy decision of the State reserving the area for mining of mineral sand through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings can be said to be in derogation of MMDR Act. The policy of the State that the mining of minerals sand will be done only through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings is well in consonance with the provisions of MMDR Act. It can hardly be disputed that the State Government has the executive power to reserve any area for exploitation of minerals to public sector undertakings.[37]

State Government being owner of the minerals lying within its territory by virtue of the powers conferred Under Sections 10 and 17A(2) and having regard to the aforesaid clauses in the National Policy granting liberty to the State to select the companies/entrepreneurs of its choice for setting up projects/plants for exploitation of beach sand minerals, the policy of the State Government, reserving the area for mining of the mineral sand done through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings cannot be said to be in derogation of MMDR Act and MC Rules. It cannot be contended that the State has no legislative competence and the Executive has no power to frame a policy reserving the area for exploitation of beach sand mineral by State/Central Public Sector Undertakings.[40]

As per the Industrial Policy 2007 of the State of Kerala, the mining and exploitation of beach sand minerals will be permitted only through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings. The reason behind the said policy decision is to restrict the indiscriminate mining and exploitation of minerals by scientific mining taking into account the geographical and ecological conditions as well as density of the population. The applications of the Respondents are for mining lease of Titanium-bearing minerals ilmenite, rutile, leucoxene, zircon minerals and as per Part B of the First Schedule to the MMDR Act, these minerals are categorized as Atomic Minerals. As per Article 48A of the Constitution, the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and this is a constitutional mandate. Kerala being a State with long coastal areas and backwaters and State being densely populated, State Government's decision to reserve mining lease of beach sand minerals to State/Central Public Sector Undertakings is stated to be in larger public interest. Major portion of the land in which mining operation sought to be carried out by first Respondent is Kayal Poramboke and Sea Poramboke Land. The policy adopted by the State of Kerala is well in consonance with the National Mineral policy as both are designed to encourage the scientific methods of mining, beneficiation and economic utilization.[42]

The National policy specifies that there shall be transparency and fair play in the reservation for one over another in the public interest. Apparently the State of Kerala has reserved the area for public sector undertakings in order to prevent environmental degradation and to ensure the maintainability of public health. The State Government cannot be expected to take any decision which may have adverse health impact on the people of the State residing in those areas. The policy of the State is also in consonance with Section 18 of the MMDR Act which provides that it shall be the duty of the Central Government to take all steps for conservation and systematic development of minerals in India. The State Government's policy is in adherence to sustainable development which is a constitutional mandate and the State has tried to balance the developmental needs and the need for protection of environment and ecology. Respondent's contention that the State Government's policy is violative of provisions of the MMDR Act and National Policy is wholly misplaced. The High Court failed to consider that the State of Kerala keeping in view its policy decision and the importance of environment protection rejected the application moved by the first Respondent.[42]

The observation that the policy decision of the State Government is not in consonance with the MMDR Act 1957 is not correct. Be it noted that the policy of the State of Kerala itself is not under challenge. The State Government has passed a reasoned order as to why it has chosen to reserve the area for exploitation of mineral sand in public sector undertakings and the learned Judge did not find any arbitrariness or unreasonableness in the policy of the State.[43]

Under Section 17A(2) of the MMDR Act, the statutory dispensation is the approval of the Central Government and reservation of area by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette specifying the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such areas will be reserved. No doubt, when the statute stipulates a procedure, it should be done strictly as per the procedure stipulated thereon. State Government with the approval of the Central Government has the power to reserve any area for undertaking mining operation through public sector undertakings. Recommendation of the State Government for approval of the Central Government for such reservation and issuance of notification is only procedural. As discussed earlier, the policy of the State that mining of beach and mineral would be done through public sector undertakings cannot be said to be dehors the MMDR Act or unreasonable justifying interference by the Court.[47]

Further, be it noted, the plea regarding thwarting the procedure stipulated Under Section 17A(2) of the MMDR Act under the guise of industrial policy has not been specifically raised before the High Court in the writ petition. Only during the course of arguments in this Court for the first time, such a plea was raised. Therefore steps, if any, taken by the State of Kerala in furtherance of Section 17A (2) of MMDR Act is not available on record.[48]

The approval of the Central Government required by Section 17A(2) is mandatory, but nowhere it is stated that the approval must be sought prior to the reservation. Prior approval of the Central Government before reserving any area by the State Government for the public sector undertaking is not required. Therefore, what logically follows from Section 17A(2) is that the State Government may seek approval of the Central Government even after the framing of the policy. Industrial Policy of the State can be said to be a prelude before the State makes the proposal reserving the area for exploitation of the mineral by the public sector undertakings. Respondent is not right in contending that under the guise of policy decision, the State has bye-passed the procedure stipulated Under Section 17A(2).[50]

Under Section 30 of MMDR Act after remittance of the matter, the right of the State to reconsider the matter: While allowing the revision petitions filed Under Section 30 of the MMDR Act, the Central Government directed the State Government to reconsider the matter. The High Court faulted the State Government that when the revisional authority directed reconsideration of the matter based on the "facts in issue", the binding nature of the decisions of the superior authorities in the hierarchy was not kept in view and that "it is sheer statutory and institutional insubordination" on the part of the State.[51]

By perusal of the order dated 30.11.2009 passed by the Revisional Authority, it is seen that the order was passed by the Joint Secretary (Mines) and Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor. The order only directed the State Government to reconsider the matter. When the State Government was required to reconsider the matter, State Government was free to consider the applications and take a decision. Though MMDR Act confers the revisional power on the Central Government for grant of mining lease for mining minerals other than a minor mineral, that does not mean that the State Government is denuded of its power or control over the minerals lying in the land within its territory. The State Government is the custodian of the land, mines and minerals. Under Section 10(3) State has the power to reconsider the applications in the light of its constitutional mandate of environmental protection. The High Court fell in error in faulting the State Government and in learned Judge's view, the State cannot be faulted for the alleged "institutional insubordination", as observed by the High Court.[53]

In the present case, Joint Secretary (Mines) and Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor have passed the order in the revision petition. By allowing revision petition, Central Government directed the State to reconsider the matter. As noticed earlier, National Policy on Exploitation of Beach Sand Minerals issued by the Department of Atomic Energy reserves liberty to the State for selection of Companies/Entrepreneurs for setting up of projects/plants for exploitation of beach sand minerals. Grant or refusal of mining lease and mining of minerals involves considerable high stakes both in terms of commercial value and the fact that such a decision will have impact on the concept of mineral development, it is for the State to exercise its discretion either to grant or refuse mining lease.[55]

It is well settled that no one has legal or vested right for the grant of mining lease. Mere disappointment of expectation cannot be a ground for interfering with the policy of the State reserving the areas for exploitation of beach sand mineral by State/Central Public Sector Undertakings.[57]

No doubt by G.O. (MS) No. 105/04/ID dated 15.09.2004, State has sanctioned mining leases to the first Respondent. But within ten days by order dated 25.09.2004, the mining lease granted to first Respondent was stopped on the ground that the detailed study on the environment impact will be undertaken before taking further action in the matter. The Rule of promissory estoppel can be invoked only if on the basis of representation made by the Government, the party has substantially altered the position. Within short time of ten days, in learned Judge's view, first Respondent could not have altered its position so as to invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel.[58]

State of Kerala has the legislative competence to take the policy decision reserving the area for exploitation of minerals by the public sector undertakings and the said policy cannot be said to be dehors the MMDR Act 1957 and MC Rules. The High Court fell in error in not appreciating the policy of the State in the light of the constitutional mandate and the decision taken by the State for the welfare of the State and exploitation of the mineral by scientific mining by public sector undertakings. In the result, the impugned common judgment of the High Court is set aside and these appeals are allowed.[59] and[60]

JUDGMENT
Authored By : T.S. Thakur, R. Banumathi
T.S. Thakur, C.J.I.
1. Leave granted.
2. These appeals arise out of a common judgment and order dated 13th November, 2014 passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam, whereby, Writ Appeals Nos. 1610, 1611 and 1621 of 2014 filed by the Appellants-State of Kerala have been dismissed affirming thereby an order passed by a Single Bench of that Court, allowing the writ petitions filed by the Respondent.
3. By an order dated 15th September, 2004 the Government of Kerala sanctioned the grant of mining leases for Ilmenite, Rutile, Leucoxene, Zircon and Sillimanite (non-scheduled mineral) for a period of 20 years. The order came in exercise of the powers vested in the State Government Under Section 11(5) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and was preceded by the approval of the Government of India in terms of Section 5(1) thereof. Shortly after the issue of the sanction order, however, the State Government by another order dated 25th September, 2004 stayed further action in the matter on the ground that a detailed study on the environmental impact of the proposed leases need be undertaken before taking any further steps. This was followed by nine letters dated 12th October, 2006, 16th October, 2006 and 9th November, 2006 addressed to the Respondent-company stating in no uncertain terms that the Government of Kerala did not consider it necessary to grant mining leases for mineral sand to private parties. Aggrieved by the said letters and communications, the Respondents filed nine revision applications No. 14(1)/2007-RC-II to 14(3)/2007-RC-II and 14(6)/2007-RC-II to 14(11)/2007-RC-II Under Section 30 of the Act aforementioned before the Government of India. These revision applications were heard and allowed by the prescribed revisional authority by a common order dated 30th November, 2009, setting aside the impugned orders and remanding the matters to the State Government to reconsider the cases in the light of the observations made in the order passed by the revisional authority. The operative portion of the order passed by the revisional authority was in the following words:
......... 9. After hearing both the sides, we find that the State Government had recommended the mining lease applications of the applicant for seeking prior approval of the Central Government in line with the policy resolution dated 22.10.2002. In 7 cases the Central Government had also accorded its prior approval Under Section 5(1) of the MMDR Act, 1957 for the proposal of the State Government for grant of mining lease for mineral sand in favour of the revision applicant. The impugned orders have been passed by the State Government after obtaining the prior approval of the Central Government in 7 cases, the State Government is required to pass order Under Section 10(3) of the MMDR Act. In all the 9 cases, including those in which prior approval of Central Government has been conveyed, the impugned orders passed by the State Government are against competitive edge of the mining industry. The policy decision of the State Government appears to be not in consonance with the MMDR Act, 1957 and also against the National Mineral Policy, 2008.
10. The impugned orders in all the 9 revision applications mentioned above are set aside with a direction to the State Government to reconsider nil 9 cases in the light of the discussions made in para 9 above and pass appropriate orders accordingly.
4. Upon remand, the Government of Kerala once again examined the matter and by an order dated 15th December, 2010 rejected all the applications filed by the Respondents on the ground that although, as per Entry 54 List-I (Union List), Schedule VII of the Constitution of India, the Parliament is competent to make laws for Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent such Regulation and development is declared by the Parliament by law to be expedient in public interest, yet, the power of granting mining leases for mining minerals vested only in the State Government Under Section 10 of the Act aforementioned. The Government referred to and relied upon its own industrial policy of 2007 according to which mining and exploitation of minerals were permissible only through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings in order to restrict indiscriminate mining and exploitations of minerals having regard in particular to the geographical and ecological conditions as well as the density of the population in the State of Kerala. The State Government took the view that it had the power and control over the minerals lying in the land within its territory and that it was entitled to safeguard the same in larger public interest by formulating suitable policies on the subject. Relying upon the decisions of the High Court of Kerala in Shibu v. Tahsildar [1993 (2) KLT 870] and Gem Granites v. State of Kerala and Ors. [MANU/KE/0150/2006 : 2006 (2) KLT 899] the Government declared that as the owner of the minerals lying in the land within its territorial limits it was entitled to determine in public interest that mining and exploitation of minerals will be permitted only through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings. The State Government insisted that such a policy was not contrary to the Act nor did it suffer from any constitutional infirmity. It also relied upon the fact that minerals in question were categorised as Atomic Minerals as per Part-B of the First Schedule to the Act aforementioned. The Government declared that environmental protection being one of its constitutional mandates, any decision that may affect environment or Sections of people living in the coastal areas or which may affect environmental conditions in those areas cannot be said to be in public interest.
5. Aggrieved by the order passed by the State Government, the Respondent-company filed Writ Petitions No. 34345 of 2010, 34346 of 2010 and 5420 of 2011 before the High Court of Kerala inter alia praying for a writ of mandamus directing the State to implement the revisional order issued by the Government of India and grant in favour of the Respondents mining leases in respect of all the areas which were the subject matter of the said order. The Respondents also prayed for a declaration to the effect that the order passed by the Central Government in exercise of its powers Under Section 30 of the Act aforementioned was binding upon the State Government and that any policy decision by the State Government contrary to the said decision will not affect the rights of the Respondents to obtain mining leases for the areas applied for. The Respondent also prayed for a mandamus directing the State Government to forward to the Government of India for approval all the mining lease applications made by the Respondent-Company which had not so far been forwarded for such approval.
6. By an order dated 21st February, 2013 passed by a Single Judge of High Court of Kerala, the Writ Petitions mentioned above were allowed in part by the High Court inasmuch as the order passed by the State Government was quashed and the matter remitted back to the Government to pass orders in the light of the observations made by the High Court. The High Court quashed the order by which further action in the matter was stayed by the Government with a direction to the Government to consider the applications pending with it in accordance with law. The High Court took the view that the State Government had not reserved, in terms of Section 17A(2) of the 1957 Act, the areas covered by the applications filed by the Respondents and that so long as no such reservation was made, the direction issued by the Central Government to the State Government to reconsider the applications could not be negated. The High Court also held that the State Government had overlooked the provisions of the National Mineral Policy, 2008, which permitted facilitation of private entrepreneurs and that since the Government of Kerala had already exercised its discretion in terms of the prevalent Mining Policy and recommended to the Government of India the grant of approval for mining leases, the rejection of the applications on the basis of a changed policy after the Government of India had accorded sanction for the proposed mining leases was unjustified. The High Court also took note of the fact that Government of Kerala had granted mining lease in respect of the area covered by four other applications and that there could not be different policies in respect of different areas covered by different applications made by the same Company.
7. Aggrieved by the order passed by the Single Judge, the State Government preferred Writ Appeals No. 1610, 1611 and 1621 of 2014 which were heard and dismissed by a Division Bench of that Court in terms of the order impugned in the present appeals. The High Court, while doing so, held that the State Government was not justified in declining mining leases on the ground that it had been simply directed to reconsider the matter. The refusal of the Government, according to the High Court, amounted to institutional insubordination. The appeals were accordingly dismissed with the observation that the State Government's role in issuing the sanction was minimal, as the subject matter of the law fell within the domain of Central Government. The present appeals by special leave question the correctness of the above order, as already noted above.
8. The law relating to mines and minerals development and Regulation as also the interpretation of the provisions of the 1957 Act has been the subject matter of a long line of decisions of this Court. It is, in our view, unnecessary to refer to all such decisions as have dealt with different facets of the controversy relating to the powers of the Central Government and those of the State Governments in relation to Regulation and development of mines and minerals including the power to levy taxes, fee and cesses and royalties. Decisions of this Court in Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa [MANU/SC/0037/1960 : AIR 1961 SC 459]; State of Orissa v. M.A. Tulloch and Co. [MANU/SC/0021/1963 : AIR 1964 SC 1284]; India Cement Ltd. v. State of Tamil Nadu [MANU/SC/0226/1989 : (1990) 1 SCC 12]; Orissa Cement Ltd. v. State of Orissa [MANU/SC/0381/1991 : 1991 Supp (1) SCC 430]; State of Orissa v. Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. [MANU/SC/0361/1995 : 1995 Supp (2) SCC 686]; Saurashtra Cement and Chemical Industries Ltd. and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. [(2001) 1 SCC 91]; and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills Ltd. [MANU/SC/0440/1995 : 1995 Supp(1) SCC 642] have elaborately dealt with the legislative power of the States to levy taxes, fees and cesses on the minerals regulated by the Act. Dealing with various hues and colours of such levies this Court held that once the Parliament declares it to be expedient in public interest to bring the Regulation and development of mines and minerals under the control of the Union in public interest, the subject to the extent laid down by the Parliament comes within the exclusive domain of the Parliament and that any legislation by the State after such declaration that has the effect of trenching upon the field, must necessarily be unconstitutional.
9. We are not, in the present case, dealing with a challenge to the levy of any tax, fee, cess or royalty nor is the vires of any legislation enacted by the State under challenge before us. We are, instead, examining whether the State Government was justified in declining the applications for grant of leases in favour of the Respondent-company on the ground that the mineral wealth found in the coastal regions of the State was vested in the State Government and that it was in exercise of its right of ownership over the said deposits entitled to reserve in its own favour or in favour of State owned companies or corporations the right to exploit such deposits. The State Government as noticed in the earlier part of the judgment has, while declining applications for grant of lease, relied upon its own policy according to which the mineral deposits in question are reserved for exploitation by a State agency only. Two precise questions, therefore, fall for consideration in the light of the stance taken by the State Government viz.:
(i) Whether the ownership in the mineral reserves is vested in the State Government; and
(ii) If it is, whether the Government has the right to decline leases on the ground that the minerals or the areas where the same are found have been reserved for exploitation by government companies or corporations.
10. In Monnet Ispat and Energy Limited v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0601/2012 : 2012 (11) SCC 1, Lodha, J., as His Lordship then was, speaking for the Court, held that no one can claim any right in any land belonging to the Government or in any mines in any land belonging to the Government except under the 1957 Act and 1960 Rules nor can any person claim any fundamental right to a lease or prospecting license qua any land belonging to the Government. The mines and minerals, observed the Court, within the territory of a State would vest in the State Government especially when the land where such minerals deposits are found is owned by the Government as is also the position in the case at hand. In fairness to counsel for the Respondents it must be mentioned that there was no real dispute as to the ownership of the minerals found in the Government owned land. What was strenuously argued by learned Counsel for the Respondents was that the State Government could not, on the basis of its own mineral policy, decline consideration to the applications filed by the Respondents, when such policy was in conflict with the mineral policy of the Government of India.
11. The Mineral Policy 2008 of the Government of India, inter alia, provides as under:
4. ROLE OF THE STATE IN MINERAL DEVELOPMENT
The role to be played by the Central and State Government in regard to mineral development has been extensively dealt in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and Rules made under the Act by the Central Government and the State Governments in their respective domains. The provisions of the Act and the Rules will be reviewed and harmonised with the basic features of the new National Mineral Policy. In future the core functions of the State in mining will be facilitation and Regulation of exploration and mining activities of investors and entrepreneurs, provision of infrastructure and tax collection. In mining activities, there shall be arms length distance between State agencies (Public Sector Undertakings) that mine and those that regulate. There shall be transparency and fair play in the reservation of ore bodies to State agencies on such areas where private players are not holding or have not applied for exploration or mining, unless security considerations or specific public interests are involved.
xxx xxx xxx
5.2 While these Government agencies will continue to perform the tasks assigned to them for exploration and survey, the private sector would in future be the main source of investment in reconnaissance and exploration and government agencies will expend public funds primarily in areas where private sector investments are not forthcoming despite the desirability of programmes due to reasons such as high uncertainties.
12. It would thus appear that for the minerals in question there was no reservation made in favour of any State owned corporation or agency. That is perhaps the reason why the Government of India had granted approval to the State Governments recommendations on some of the applications filed by the Respondents. The State Government Policy, however, runs contrary to the National Mineral Policy, 2008 formulated by the Government of India, Ministry of Mines, in so far as it does not permit a mining lease in favour of any entity other than a State owned corporation or agency. The State Industrial Policy-2007, relied upon by the State Government in this regard to the extent it is relevant for our purposes, is as under:
12.0 MINING & GEOLOGY
12.1 Intensive efforts will be made to explore and utilize mineral resources of the State without adversely affecting the ecology and environment. Mineral exploration activities for iron ores, high grade china clay, bauxite and other minerals will be streamlined and strengthened.
12.2 Mining of mineral sand will be done through State/Central Public Sector Undertakings only. However mining of minerals will not be permitted in those areas where the Government appointed Expert Committee recommendation against mining. Government will encourage manufacture of Value Added Products.
12.3 The Government will conduct a scientific study on mineral deposits in the State.
12.2.1 Titanium
Considering the rich mineral deposits in the State, a comprehensive scheme to produce Titanium Metal, Titanium composites by using State-of-the-art technology shall be evolved with the help of Central Government agencies and International organisations. If the potential of this natural resource is used properly and scientifically, it will immensely pave way for rapid industrialisation of the State as Titanium is a unique material for strategic applications. The approach is not to limit the activities to manufacturing alone but to harness its vast potential by setting up a chain of Titanium based industries through forward integration. However, utmost care shall be taken to contain the adverse impact on environment by mining, processing and related activities by adopting strict monitoring and control measures. To develop a package for making use of the immense potential of titanium, support shall be availed from national and international organisations.
13. It is argued by Mr. Parasaran, learned senior Counsel for the Appellant that the policy aforementioned must be taken to be a reservation in favour of the State owned agencies within the comprehension of Section 17A of the aforementioned Act. Section 17A of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 reads as under:
17A. Reservation of areas for purposes of conservation.-(1) The Central Government, with a view to conserving any mineral and after consultation with the State Government, may reserve any area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease and, where it proposes to do so, it shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such area will be reserved.
(1A) The Central Government may in consultation with the State Government, reserve any area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease, for undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it, and where it proposes to do so, it shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such area will be reserved.
(2) The State Government may, with the approval of the Central Government, reserve any area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease, for undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it and where it proposes to do so, it shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such areas will be reserved.
(2A) Where in exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1A) or Sub-section (2), the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, reserves any area for undertaking prospecting or mining operations, the State Government shall grant prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, in respect of such area to such Government company or corporation:
Provided that in respect of any mineral specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule, the State Government shall grant the prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, only after obtaining the previous approval of the Central Government.
(2B) Where the Government company or corporation is desirous of carrying out the prospecting operations or mining operations in a joint venture with other persons, the joint venture partner shall be selected through a competitive process, and such Government company or corporation shall hold more than seventy-four per cent of the paid up share capital in such joint venture.
(2C) A mining lease granted to a Government company or corporation, or a joint venture, referred to in Sub-sections (2A) and (2B), shall be granted on payment of such amount as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3) Where in exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1A) or Sub-section (2) the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, undertakes prospecting or mining operations in any area in which the minerals vest in a private person, it shall be liable, to pay prospecting fee, royalty, surface rent or dead rent, as the case may be, from time to time at the same rate at which it would have been payable under this Act if such prospecting or mining operations had been undertaken by a private person under prospecting licence or mining lease.
14. There is no gainsaying that the State Government can reserve any area not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease for undertaking prospecting or mining operations through a Government company or corporation owned or controlled by it, but, in terms of Sub-section(2) of Section 17A (supra) where the Government proposes to do so, it shall by notification in the official gazette specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such areas will be reserved. Three distinct requirements emerge from Section 17A(2) for a valid reservation viz.:
(i) the reservation can only be with the approval of the Central Government and must confine to areas not already held under any prospecting licence or mining lease;
(ii) the reservation must be made by a notification in the official gazette; and
(iii) the notification must specify the boundaries of such areas and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such areas will be reserved.