MANU/SC/0304/2019
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 10373-10374 of 2010
Decided On: 01.03.2019
Appellants: State of Gujarat and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Jayeshbhai Kanjibhai Kalathiya and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.K. Sikri, S. Abdul Nazeer and M.R. Shah, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Madhavi Divan, A.S.G., Ashok Kumar Panda, Sr. Adv., Preetesh Kapur, Hemantika Wahi, Jesal Wahi, Puja Singh, Vishakha, Amit Sharma, A.K. Kaul, Rekha Pandey, S. Wasim, A. Quadri, Raj Bahadur, Arun Yadav, Sumita Ray, D.N. Ray, Lokesh K. Choudhary, Dilip Kumar Nayak, Disha Ray, Praveen Kumar Rai and Hemal Kiritkumar Sheth, Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Mines and Minerals
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Constitution Of India - Article 301; Constitution Of India - Article 302; Constitution Of India - Article 303; Mines And Minerals (Development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 15; Mines And Minerals (Development And Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23-C
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 2, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 4, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 4(1A), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 4A, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 5, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 6, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 7, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 8, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 9, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 10, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 11, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 12, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 13, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 14, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 15, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 15(1), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 15(1A), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 15A, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 16, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 18, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 21, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23A, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23C, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23C(2), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 23C(1), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 30, Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 30(1), Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Section 30(2); Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1999 - Section 4(1A), Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1999 - Section 23A, Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1999 - Section 23C; Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966 - Rule 44BB; Gujarat Minor Mineral (Amendment) Rules, 2010 - Rule 44BB; Gujarat Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2010 - Rule 71; Gujarat Mineral (Prevention of Illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2005; Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 19(1), Constitution of India - Article 19(6), Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 38, Constitution of India - Article 39, Constitution of India - Article 48A, Constitution of India - Article 51A, Constitution of India - Article 226, Constitution of India - Article 301, Constitution of India - Article 302, Constitution of India - Article 302(2), Constitution of India - Article 303, Constitution of India - Article 304
Cases Referred:
C. Narayana Reddy and etc. v. Commissioner of Panchayat Raj and Rural Employment, A.P., Hyderabad and Ors. MANU/AP/0917/2003 : AIR 2004 AP 234; D. Sivakumar v. Government of Tamil Nadu Writ Petition Nos. 23317 and 24211 of 2008; Municipal Corporation of the City of Toronto v. Virgo; Attorney-General for Ontario v. Attorney-General for the Dominions; State of U.P. v. Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd.; G.K. Krishnan v. State of Tamil Nadu; Commonwealth of Australia v. Bank of New South Wales; Quarry Owners' Association v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0504/2000 : (2000) 8 SCC 655; Indian Handicrafts Emporium v. Union of India MANU/SC/0640/2003 : (2003) 7 SCC 589; State of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone and Ors. MANU/SC/0394/1981 : (1981) 2 SCC 205; T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0596/2005 : (2006) 1 SCC 1; D.K. Trivedi & Sons and Ors. v. State of Gujarat and Ors. MANU/SC/0636/1986 : 1986 Supp SCC 20; Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited v. National Thermal Power Corporation Limited and Ors. MANU/SC/0346/2009 : (2009) 6 SCC 235; K. Ramanathan v. State of Tamil Nadu and Anr. MANU/SC/0034/1985 : (1985) 2 SCC 116; U.P. Cooperative Cane Unions Federations v. West U.P. Sugar Mills Association and Ors. MANU/SC/0455/2004 : (2004) 5 SCC 430; State of Tamil Nadu v. M.P.P. Kavery Chetty MANU/SC/0165/1995 : (1995) 2 SCC 402; Amritlal Nathubhai Shah and Ors. v. Union Government of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0037/1976 : (1976) 4 SCC 108; Monnet Ispat and Energy Limited v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0601/2012 : (2012) 11 SCC 1; State of Tripura and Ors. v. Sudhir Ranjan Nath MANU/SC/0265/1997 : (1997) 3 SCC 665; K.T. Varghese and Ors. v. State of Kerala and Ors. MANU/SC/0830/2008 : (2008) 3 SCC 735; Video Electronics Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. v. State of Punjab and Anr. MANU/SC/0644/1989 : (1990) 3 SCC 87
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 19.10.2010 of the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Special Civil Application Nos. 6204 of 2010 with Special Civil Application Nos. 7321 of 2010 (MANU/GJ/1567/2010)
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  3

Mentioned
  18

Case Note:
Mines and Minerals - Framing of legislation - Power thereto - Rules 44BB and 71 Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 2010 and Sections 15 and 23C of Mines and Minerals Act, 1957 - Writ petitions was filed against Resolution whereby all leaseholders, stockists, traders and exporters were prohibited from exporting ordinary sand excavated from areas in State of Gujarat to other States - When these writ petitions were pending consideration, Government issued Notification thereby amending Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966 by making Gujarat Minor Mineral (Amendment) Rules, 2010 with insertion of Rule 44-BB, with immediate effect - By way of Rule 44-BB, movement of sand beyond border of State of Gujarat was prohibited - State also notified Gujarat Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2010 so as to repeal Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966 - Rule 71 of new Rules was to same effect as Rule 44-BB which prohibit transport of sand beyond border - High Court had, allowed writ petitions and struck down said Rules as ultra vires - Hence, present appeal - Whether impugned Rules framed by State as delegate of Parliament were beyond powers granted to it under MMDR Act and impugned Rules were violative of Part XIII of Constitution of India.

Facts:

The writ petitions was filed against the Resolution whereby all leaseholders, stockists, traders and exporters were prohibited from exporting ordinary sand excavated from the areas in the State of Gujarat to other States within the country or other countries by transporting such sand outside the State or the country. When these writ petitions were pending consideration Government issued a Notification thereby amending the Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966 by making the Gujarat Minor Mineral (Amendment) Rules, 2010 with the insertion of Rule 44-BB, with immediate effect. By way of Rule 44-BB, movement of sand beyond the border of the State of Gujarat was prohibited. State also notified the Gujarat Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2010 so as to repeal the Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966. Rule 71 of the new Rules was to the same effect as Rule 44-BB which prohibit transport of sand beyond border. The High Court had, vide impugned judgment, allowed the writ petitions and struck down the aforesaid Rules as ultra vires on the ground that the Rule making power of the State Government did not empower and cannot be stretched to empower the State Government to make Rules directly prohibiting movement of mineral so as to impinge upon the freedom guaranteed by Article 301 of the Constitution.

Held, while dismissing the appeal:

(i) This Court in M.P.P. Kavery Chetty and K.T. Varghese held that power of the State Government under Section 15 of the MMDR Act does not include control over minor minerals after they are excavated. [36]

(ii) The words transportation and storage in Section 23-C of Act were to be interpreted. Here the two words were used in the context of illegal mining. It was clear that it was the transportation and storage of illegal mining and not the mining of minor minerals like sand which was legal and backed by duly granted license, which could be regulated under this provision. Therefore, no power flows from this provision to make Rule for regulating transportation of the legally excavated minerals. [42]

(iii) The impugned Rules violate Part XIII of the Constitution as the effect thereof was to fetter the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse under Article 301 of the Constitution. Under this Article, the expression freedom must be read with the expression throughout the territory of India. Under Article 302, Parliament may impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another as may be required in the public interest. The expression public interest may include a regional interest as well. However, Article 302 is qualified by Article 303 which prohibits Parliament and the State Legislatures from making any law that gives preference to one State over another or discriminates between one State and another. Situations of scarcity are to be dealt with by Parliament under Article 302(2). The power of State Legislature to impose reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse, as may be required in the public interest, requires such a Bill or amendment to be moved in the State Legislature only after receiving previous sanction from the President. The President, being the head of the State and the guardian of the federation, must be satisfied that such a law was indeed required and, thus, acts as a check on the promotion of provincial interests over national interest. Going by the said scheme of this Chapter, it becomes apparent that when there are such restrictions on a State Legislature, then the State Government could not have imposed such a prohibition under a statute whose object was to regulate mines and mineral development, and not trade and commerce per se. [43]

(iv) In order to justify any preference or discrimination under Article 303, a scarcity of goods would have to be made out. It was a matter of record that the Study Group's report on which reliance was placed by the Appellant focuses on the need to restrict the export of sand outside India and not within India. In any case, nothing prevents the Appellant from restricting the quantum of sand being excavated. However, once the Appellant State permits sand to be excavated, neither could it legally restrict its movement within the territory of India nor is the same constitutionally permissible. Likewise, there was no restriction on the State importing sand from other states. If it was the case that the demand of any State is not being met, it may purchase sand from other states. In any event, the market would dictate trade in sand inasmuch as it may make no business sense for mining company to transport and sell its sand in a far away destination after incurring large costs on transportation. [46]

Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
JUDGMENT
A.K. Sikri, J.
1. Two writ petitions were filed in the High Court of Gujarat Under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. One writ petition was filed by a single person (Respondent herein) who had been awarded contract for one year to extract, collect, gather and remove ordinary sand from river Tapi falling within certain area at village Amboli, Taluka Kamrej, Surat. The sand being a mine and mineral, it is the State Government which is empowered to grant such leases. After the excavation of sand, a part there of was subjected to further processing by addition of fly ash and the other part was sold as sand outside the State of Gujarat. Second petition was filed by ten Petitioners (Respondents in the second appeal). They are in the business of processing ordinary river sand after buying it from leaseholders. The process involves washing, cleaning and mixing fly ash to convert it into IS-Zone-2-Sand, which is then sold in 50 kg. Bags under a brand name. These Respondents supply that sand to builders in the State of Maharashtra.
2. As is clear from the aforesaid facts, sand, after processing, is sold outside the State of Gujarat. The challenge laid in the writ petitions was against the Resolution No. GMR-102010-1-S-CHH dated May 04, 2010 whereby all leaseholders, stockists, traders and exporters were prohibited from exporting ordinary sand excavated from the areas in the State of Gujarat to other States within the country or other countries by transporting such sand outside the State or the country. When these writ petitions were pending consideration, the Government of Gujarat issued a Notification on June 11, 2010 thereby amending the Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966 by making the Gujarat Minor Mineral (Amendment) Rules, 2010 with the insertion of Rule 44-BB, with immediate effect. This amendment was done in purported exercise of powers conferred Under Section 15 read with Section 23-C of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the 'MMDR Act'). By way of Rule 44-BB, movement of sand beyond the border of the State of Gujarat was prohibited. Rule 44-BB reads as under:
No movement of sand shall be allowed beyond the border of the State. In case any vehicle is found transporting sand to the neighbouring State, even with authorized royalty pass or delivery challan, it shall be treated as violation of the Act and the Rules made thereunder and the penal provisions as specified therein shall be applicable.
3. Within two months thereafter, i.e. on August 26, 2010, the State of Gujarat also notified the Gujarat Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2010 so as to repeal the Gujarat Minor Mineral Rules, 1966. Rule 71 of the new Rules was to the same effect as Rule 44-BB and the same is as under:
Rule 71. Prohibition to transport sand beyond border. - No movement of sand shall be allowed beyond the border of the State. In case any vehicle is found transporting sand to the neighbouring State even with authorized royalty pass or delivery challan, it shall be treated as violation of the Act and the Rules made thereunder and the penal provisions, except compounding, as specified therein shall be applicable.
4. This led the Respondents to amend the writ petitions thereby incorporating challenge to Rule 44-BB of Amendment Rules as well as Rule 71 of the Concession Rules. The High Court has, vide impugned judgment, allowed the writ petitions and struck down the aforesaid Rules as ultra vires on the ground that the Rule making power of the State Government does not empower and cannot be stretched to empower the State Government to make Rules directly prohibiting movement of mineral so as to impinge upon the freedom guaranteed by Article 301 of the Constitution. It may be noted here itself that a Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in C. Narayana Reddy and etc. v. Commissioner of Panchayat Raj and Rural Employment, A.P., Hyderabad and Ors. MANU/AP/0917/2003 : AIR 2004 AP 234 had taken a contrary view. Likewise, the Madras High Court had also decided this issue vide its judgment dated April 27, 2009 in D. Sivakumar v. Government of Tamil Nadu1 by taking similar view as that of the Andhra Pradesh High Court. In the impugned judgment, the Gujarat High Court has, however, differed with the Andhra Pradesh and Madras High Courts. Having regard to the conflicting opinion of the High Courts, leave was granted in this matter. This is how the instant appeals came to be heard finally by this Court.
5. Before proceeding further, we would like to recapitulate, in broad, the scheme of the MMDR Act insofar as it relates to regulating minor minerals are concerned and the powers that are delegated by the Central Government to the State Governments in respect of minor minerals. In this very hue, we also propose to take note of the relevant provisions of the MMDR Act.
6. The MMDR Act is enacted by Parliament to provide for the Regulation of mines and development of minerals under the control of the Union, i.e. the Central Government. Section 2 provides a declaration to this effect with the stipulation that it is expedient in the public interest that Union should take under its control, the Regulation of mines and development of minerals, to the extent provided in the Act. It is for this reason the Union took control insofar as Regulation of mines and development of minerals is concerned. In order to exercise this control, no reconnaissance or mining operations in any area are allowed by any person except with the permission of the Central Government. Even transportation or storage is prohibited otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the MMDR Act and the Rules made thereunder (Section 4).
7. Section 13 of the MMDR Act empowers the Central Government to make Rules in respect of minerals.
8. It follows from the above that as far as minor minerals are concerned, limited powers are given to the State Government inasmuch as Under Section 15 of the MMDR Act the State Government is authorised to make Rules in respect of minor minerals. Relevant portions of this Section read as under:
15. Power of State Governments to make Rules in respect of minor minerals. - (1) The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make Rules for regulating the grant of quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals and for purposes connected therewith.
(1A) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such Rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely -
xx xx xx
(d) the terms on which, and the conditions subject to which and the authority by which quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions may be granted or renewed;
xx xx xx
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed.
xx xx xx
9. There was an amendment to this Act by way of Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Amendment Act, 1999 (No. 38 of 1999) which became effective from December 18, 1999. By this Amendment Act, Section 4(1A), Section 23-A and Section 23-C were inserted. We would like to reproduce these Sections along with the Statement of Objects and Reasons which prompted the Legislature to insert these provisions:
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 provides for the regular and development of minerals other than petroleum and natural gas. Consequent upon the decisions taken in the Conference of the State Ministers/Secretaries of Mines and Geology held in December, 1996, a Committee under the Chairmanship of the then Secretary, Ministry of Mines was constituted in February, 1997 to, inter alia, make recommendations regarding delegation of powers to the State Governments relating to grant and renewal of prospecting licences and mining leases and other related approvals and to suggest measures to reduce delay in this regard, review of the existing laws and procedures governing the Regulation and development of minerals to make them more compatible with the changed policies and measures for prevention of illegal mining. The Committee in his report made wide-ranging recommendations in the area of delegation of powers to the State Governments, procedural simplifications, etc. which will go a long way to mitigate the problems faced by the States and the prospective investors while, at the same time, keeping the interests of the mining industry in particular and the national interest, in general, in tact. After careful consideration of the recommendations of the Committee, the Government has decided to amend the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1946.
2. Some of the more important amendments to be made are as follows:
xx xx xx
(iii) A new provision is proposed to be inserted in the Act prohibiting transportation or storage or anything causing transportation or storage of any mineral except under the due provisions of the Act, with a view to preventing illegal mining. Further, the Act is proposed to be amended to cover the breach of the provisions of the proposed new provision of the Act to be punishable. It is also proposed to insert a new provision to provide for anything seized under the Act as liable for confiscation under court orders. A new Section is proposed to be inserted to empower the State Governments to make Rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals and for purposes connected therewith.
Section 4(1A)
No person shall transport or store or cause to be transported or stored any mineral otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Rules made thereunder.
Section 23-C
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make Rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals and for the purposes connected therewith.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such Rules may provide for all or any of the following mattes, namely:
(a) establishment of check-posts for checking of minerals under transit;
(b) establishment of weigh-bridges to measure the quantity of mineral being transported;
(c) Regulation of mineral being transported from the area granted under a prospecting licence or a mining lease or a quarrying licence or a permit, in whatever name the permission to excavate minerals, has been given;
(d) inspection, checking and search of minerals at the place of excavation or storage or during transit;
(e) maintenance of registers and forms for the purposes of these rules;
(f) the period within which and the authority to which applications for revision of any order passed by any authority be preferred under any Rule made under this Section and the fees to be paid therefor and powers of such authority for disposing of such applications; and
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed for the purpose of prevention of illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 30, the Central Government shall have no power to revise any order passed by a State Government or any of its authorised officers or any authority under the Rules made Under Sub-sections (1) and (2).
10. As noted above, the impugned Rules are made in exercise of the powers conferred Under Section 23-C of the MMDR Act. Further, as Section 14 categorically states that provisions of Section 5 to 13 are not applicable in respect of minor minerals, Rule making power of the Central Government contained in Section 13 does not extend to minor minerals. It is in this context Section 15 gives power to the State Government to make Rules in respect of minor minerals. The State Government, thus, is given power Under Section 15. It is also given power Under Section 23-C.
11. A perusal of Sections 15 and 23-C in relation to the aforesaid discussion would clearly suggest that the power of the State Government to make Rules is restricted to:
(a) making Rules for grant of quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions in respect of minor minerals and for the purposes connected therewith; and
(b) making Rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals and for the purposes connected therewith.
12. In the aforesaid context, question arose before the High Court as to whether in exercise of such powers delegated by the Legislature upon the State Government, could the State Government make a Rule to the effect that the sand which is a minor mineral would not be allowed to be taken beyond the borders of the State of Gujarat and making such movement as punishable offence. According to the High Court, delegation of powers to the State Government under the aforesaid provisions does not include or envisage restriction on inter-State trade, commerce and intercourse which shall be free. Thus, the impugned Rules are held to be ultra vires the provisions of Section 15 and 23-C of the MMDR Act. They are also held to be violative of Article 301 of the Constitution. Relevant discussion on this aspect by the Gujarat High Court in the impugned judgment runs as under:
14. As seen earlier, the provisions of Section 4(1-A) and Section 23-C were simultaneously added by the amendment of 1999, with the objective of prohibiting transportation or storage of any mineral, except in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made in that behalf, with a view to preventing illegal mining. Prohibition or restriction of inter-State trade of any mineral was neither intended nor provided or envisaged either expressly or by necessary implication. On the other hand, delegation of powers to make Rules either in Section 15 or in Section 23-C of the Act is not couched in general terms as in Section 18. Section 18 exclusively empowers the Central Government to make such Rules as it thinks fit for the purpose of conservation and development of minerals in the whole country. Apart from delegation of such powers couched in wider terms, the Central Government is specifically authorized to make Rules for Regulation of excavation or collection of minerals from any mine as well as for storage of minerals. As against that, the State Government is empowered to make rules, in respect of all minerals, for Regulation of minerals being transported from the area granted under a prospecting licence or a mining lease or a quarry licence or a permit. The context and the composite scheme of the Act contained in the provisions of Sections 4(1-A), 15, 18, 21 and 23-C clearly indicate that the delegation of power to regulate or make Rules for transportation or storage of minerals, including minor minerals, does not empower and cannot be stretched to empower the State Government to make Rules directly prohibiting movement of minerals so as to impinge upon the freedom guaranteed by Article 301 of the Constitution. In fact, the State Government has admittedly made the Gujarat Mineral (Prevention of Illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage) Rules, 2005 in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 23-C of the Act for regulating transport, possession and storage of minerals in the State; and those Rules are not under challenge. Although it is not significant, in light of the view being taken herein about validity of the impugned rules, it needs to be noted that the part of new Rule 71 taking away the facility of compounding is apparently repugnant to Section 23-A of the Act. And, if validity of the impugned Rules cannot be upheld, the impugned resolution cannot stand without the support of any legal, executive or legislative authority.
13. We may also, at this stage, refer to the reasoning given by the High Courts of Andhra Pradesh and Madras in support of their view, which is in conflict with the view taken by the Gujarat High Court. The judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court proceeds to decide the issue in the following manner:
27. Section 23-C of the Act authorises the State Government to make Rules not only for the purpose of preventing illegal mining but also for transportation and storage of minor minerals, which power would imply that even after the minor mineral has been mined, the power is conferred on the State Government to frame Rules for such mined minor mineral as regards its storage and/or its transportation and also to frame Rules to see that no illegal mining activity is carried on. Sub-clauses (a) to (g) of Clause (2) of Section 23-C are illustrative of the matters, which are covered under the Rule making power. Sub-section (2) says that in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred Under Section 23-C, Rules may provide for all or any of the said matters. Sub-clause (c) itself say that Regulations can be framed of mineral being transported from the area granted under the licence or a mining lease. Rules can be framed on any of the matters including transportation of the excavated mineral. Section 23-C is the source of power under which Rule 9-W can be said to have been framed by the State Government. We have to keep in mind that the Parliament passed the Amendment Act, 1999 (Act No. 38 of 1999) thereby inserting Section 23-C in the Principal Act after the decision of the Supreme Court in Kavery Chetty's case (supra). By the said provision, power was specifically conferred on the State Government to make Rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals. The State Government has framed the Rules thereafter. Thus, there is ample power with the State Government to frame Rules regarding transportation of the excavated minor mineral, which would include restriction on the transport of the said minor mineral beyond the limits of the State borders. In this view of the matter, the challenge to Rule 9-W is without any substance.
14. Likewise, the Madras High Court has proceeded to discuss the issue as follows:
13. Definition of the word 'Regulation'
Shri V.T. Gopalan has contended that the word 'Regulation' mentioned in Section 23-C of the Act should not be construed to mean prohibition. He further contended that a total prohibition is impermissible in law, violative of Article 19(1)(g) and, therefore, the impugned Rule is liable to be declared as bad in law. We are of the opinion that the word 'Regulation' has no fixed connotation. The said word will have to be given wider meaning when the public interest is involved. In the judgment reported in MANU/SC/0394/1981 : (1981) 2 SCC 205 (State of Tamil Nadu v. Hind Stone), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:
10. One of the arguments pressed before us was that Section 15 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act authorised the making of Rules for regulating the grant of mining leases and not for prohibiting them as Rule 8-C sought to do, and, therefore, Rule 8-C was ultra vires Section 15. Well-known cases on the subject right from Municipal Corporation of the City of Toronto v. Virgo and Attorney-General for Ontario v. Attorney-General for the Dominions up to State of U.P. v. Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd. were brought to our attention. We do not think that "Regulation" has that rigidity of meaning as never to take in "prohibition". Much depends on the context in which the expression is used in the statute and the object sought to be achieved by the contemplated Regulation. It was observed by Mathew, J. in G.K. Krishnan v. State of Tamil Nadu: "The word 'Regulation' has no fixed connotation. Its meaning differs according to the nature of the thing to which it is applied." In modern statutes concerned as they are with economic and social activities, "Regulation" must, of necessity, receive so wide an interpretation that in certain situations, it must exclude competition to the public sector from the private sector. More so in a welfare State. It was pointed out by the Privy Council in Commonwealth of Australia v. Bank of New South Wales -- and we agree with what was stated therein -- that the problem whether an enactment was regulatory or something more or whether a restriction was direct or only remote or only incidental involved, not so much legal as political, social or economic consideration and that it could not be laid down that in no circumstances could the exclusion of competition so as to create a monopoly, either in a State or Commonwealth agency, be justified. Each case, it was said, must be judged on its own facts and in its own setting of time and circumstances and it might be that in regard to some economic activities and at some stage of social development, prohibition with a view to State monopoly was the only practical and reasonable manner of Regulation. The statute with which we are concerned, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, is aimed, as we have already said more than once, at the conservation and the prudent and discriminating exploitation of minerals. Surely, in the case of a scarce mineral, to permit exploitation by the State or its agency and to prohibit exploitation by private agencies is the most effective method of conservation and prudent exploitation. If you want to conserve for the future, you must prohibit in the present. We have no doubt that the prohibiting of leases in certain cases is part of the Regulation contemplated by Section 15 of the Act.