MANU/SC/8737/2006
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 5300 of 2006
Decided On: 01.12.2006
Appellants: State of Kerala and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Unni and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and Markandey Katju, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: K.N. Bhat, Sr. Adv. and G. Prakash, Adv.
For Respondents/Defendant: L. Nageswara Rao, Sr. Adv., C.C. Thomas and Roy Abraham, Advs.
Subject: Commercial
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 47; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 272; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 320; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 325; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 326
Cases Referred:
State of Kerala and Ors. v. Maharashtra Distilleries Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0364/2005 : (2005) 11 SCC 1; S. Sundaram Pillai and Ors. etc. v. V.R. Pattabiraman and Ors. etc. MANU/SC/0387/1985 : (1985) SCC 591; Bhagwan Das Jain v. State of Punjab : (1993) Supp. 3 SCC 736; Vasu Dev Singh and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8630/2006 : 2006 (11) SCALE 108; Kerala Samsthana Chethu Thozhilali Union v. State of Kerala and Ors. MANU/SC/1654/2006 : (2006) 4 SCC 327; State of Punjab and Anr. v. Devans Modern Breweries Ltd. and Anr. MANU/SC/0961/2003 : (2004) 11 SCC 26; Ashok Lanka and Anr. v. Rishi Dikshit and Ors. MANU/SC/0389/2005 : (2005) 5 SCC 598 : and Ashok Lanka-II v. Rishi Dikshit MANU/SC/2137/2006 : (2006) 9 SCC 90 Hamdard Dawkhana (Wakf) Lal Kuan, Delhi and Anr. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0016/1959 : AIR 1960 SC 554; State of Tamil Nadu v. M.K. Kandaswami and Ors. (MANU/SC/0455/1975 : 1975 (4) SCC 745; Commissioner of Sales Tax. Delhi and Ors. v. Shri Krishna Engg. Company and Ors. MANU/SC/0060/2005 : (2005) 2 SCC 692; Rakesh Wadhwani and Ors. v. Jagdamba Industrial Corporation and Ors. MANU/SC/0373/2002 : (2002) 5 SCC 440; Bharat Hydro Power Corporation Ltd. and Ors. v. State of Assam and Anr. MANU/SC/0010/2004 : (2004) 2 SCC 553; Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Company Ltd. (3) v. Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors. and MANU/SC/1197/2006 : (2006) 3 SCC 434; Indian Handicrafts Emporium and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0640/2003 : (2003) 7 SCC 589; Balram Kumawat v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0628/2003 : (2003) 7 SCC 628; Pratap Singh v. State of Jharkhand and Another MANU/SC/0075/2005 : (2005) 3 SCC 551; Mathai v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0035/2005 : (2005) 3 SCC 260; Iqbal Singh Marwah and Anr. v. Meenakshi Marwah and Anr. MANU/SC/0197/2005 : (2005) 4 SCC 370; Murlidhar Meghraj Loya v. State of Maharashtra; Kisan Trimbak Kothula v. State of Maharashtra; Supdt. and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs to Govt. of W.B. v. Abani Maity; State of Maharashtra v. Natwarlal Damodardas Soni; Standard Chartered Bank and Ors. v. Directorate of Enforcement and Ors. MANU/SC/0380/2005 : (2005) 4 SCC 530; Tolaram Relumal v. State of Bombay; Girdhari Lal Gupta v. D.H. Mehta; D. Nataraja Mudaliar v. The State Transport Authority, Madras MANU/SC/0295/1978 : AIR 1979 SC 114; Seaford Court Estates Ltd. v. Asher (1949) 2 All ER 155 : (1969) 2 KB 481 (CA); Bhag Mal v. Ch. Parbhu Ram
Citing Reference:


Dissented
  12

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  16

Prior History / High Court Status:
From the final Judgment dated 6.10.2004 of the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in W.A. No. 1054/2003 (A) (MANU/KE/0456/2004)
Authorities Referred:
Craies on Statute Law (1971 Edn., Chapter 21)
Case Note:
Abkari Shops Disposal Rules, 2002 - Rule 9(2)--Prescription of strength of ethyl alcohol in toddy at 8.1% v/v--The contents of ethyl alcohol depend on various factors like season, weather etc.--Toddy ferments automatically--No mechanical devise exists to measure the contents of ethyl alcohol present in toddy by the licensee--Further, at what point ethyl alcohol content would exceed 8.1% v/v is not known--If the Rule is vague, ex-facie unreasonable, and unworkable--State should frame rule in consonance with equity, good conscience and workability of the rule--Impugned Rule struck down.

Held: Does not rule out the possibility of fermented toddy containing ethyl alcohol of more 8.1 % v.v. It is accepted that the fermentation is a natural process. No scientific data is available on records, nor the State could furnish any information as to how much time would it require for toddy to become fermented which would contain more than 8.1% of ethyl alcohol. Toddy, as noticed herein before, has been defined in Section 3(8) of the Act, to include fermented or unfermented juice drawn from coconut tree. Rule 9(2) of the said Rules, in our opinion, should be given a plain meaning. It should be read in its entirety. It is in two parts. The intention of the legislature must be gathered having regard to the expressions used therein. Rule 9(2) read in its entirety, states the context that thereby what is essentially sought to be prevented is adulteration of toddy. It is aimed at prevention of adulteration. The penal provision contained in first part not only directs that all toddy kept or offered for sale should be of good quality and unadulterated but also provides that nothing shall be added to it to increase its intoxicating power or for any other purpose. If the second part prescribing the contents of the ethyl alcohol in toddy is read in the context of the first part vis-a-vis Section 57(a) of the Act, it would be evident that prohibition is aimed at adulteration by addition of any foreign substance to increase its intoxicating power or for any other purpose. Validity of Rule 9(2), therefore, can be saved if the said provision is read in its entirety and rule of harmonious construction is resorted to. If, however, Rule 9(2) is sought to be invoked even for the purpose of initiating a prosecution as against a licensee even he does not add any foreign substance to it, the same, in our opinion, would render the same ultra vires, as would appear from the discussions made hereinafter. It is in dispute that there does not exist any mechanical devise to measure the contents of ethyl alcohol present in toddy. It also stands admitted that contents of ethyl alcohol in toddy would depend upon various factors including weather, season or pot in which it is kept etc. Judicial notice can he taken of the fact that each village would not have a chemical laboratory where the process of analysis of ethyl alcohol can be carried out. For example, if a sample is taken in a village, by the time sample is sent for and is analyzed, the volume of ethyl alcohol may increase. Although we are informed that some chemical is mixed when a sample is taken, no material has been placed in that behalf.
Case Category:
STATE EXCISE-TRADING IN LIQUOR-PRIVILEGES, LICENCES-DISTILLERIES BREWERIES
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. Delay condoned in S.L.Ps. Leave granted.
2. Abkari Act (for short, 'the Act') was enacted by Maharaja of Cochin by Act No. 10 of 1967, it was extended to the whole of Kerala. By reason of the provisions of the said Act, manufacture or sale of liquor, including country liquor is regulated. The regulatory statute, indisputably, is made in terms of Entry 8 of List II of the 7th Schedule of the Constitution of India. A licence is granted under the Act. The licensee is indisputably required to carry out the manufacture or sale of country liquor in terms of the provisions of the Act, rules framed thereunder as also the terms and conditions of the licence.
3. 'Alcohol' has been defined in Rule 2(b) of the Kerala Rectified Spirit Rules, 1972 in the following terms:
"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol of any strength and purity having the chemical composition C2H2OH".
"Country Liquor" has been defined in Section 3(12) of the Act to mean 'toddy or arrack'.
4. 'Toddy' has been defined in Section 3(8) of the Act to mean:
"Toddy" means fermented or unfermented juice drawn from coconut, palmyra, date, or any other kind of palm tree.
5. Rules were framed by the State of Kerala in exercise of its rule making power conferred upon it under Section 5 of the Act, pursuant whereto or in furtherance whereof 'Kerala Abkari Shops (Disposal in Auction) Rules, 2002 were framed. Rule 9(2) of the said Rules reads as under:
No toddy other than that drawn from the coconut plamyrah or choondapana palms shall be sold by the licensees. All toddy kept or offered for sale should be of good quality and unadulterated. Nothing shall be added to it to increase its intoxicating power or for any other purpose. The ethyl alcohol content of toddy kept or offered for sale drawn from coconut, palmyrah and choondapana palms should not exceed 8.1% v/v 5.2% v/v and 5.9% v/v respectively.
6. Violation of any of the provisions of the Rules, inter alia, attract the penal provisions of Section 56 of the Act, Clause (b) whereof reads as under:
56. For misconduct by licensee, etc. - Whoever, being the holder of a licence or permit granted under this Act or being in the employ of such holder and acting on his behalf -
(a)....
(b) Willfully does or omits to do anything in breach of any of the conditions of his licence or permit not otherwise provided for in this Act; or
....
shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished for each such offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
7. Section 57 of the Act, however, provides for a penal provision for adulteration of liquor by a licenced vendor or manufacturer, in the following terms:
57. For adulteration etc. by licensed vendor or manufacturer - Whoever being the holder of a licence for the sale or manufacture of liquor or of any intoxicating drug under this Act.
(a) mixes or permits to be mixed with the liquor or intoxicating drug, other than a noxious drug or any foreign ingredient likely to add to its actual or apparent intoxicating quality or strength, or any article prohibited other than an article which the Government shall deem to be noxious by any rule made under Section 29, Clause (k), when such admixture shall not amount to the offence of adulteration under Section 272 of the Indian Penal Code; or
(b).... .... ....
(c)....
(d)....
shall on conviction before a competent court, be punished for each such offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or which both.
8. The State of Kerala published Excise Manual, the relevant provisions whereof are as under:
6(a) - Fermented liquors - Toddy, Beer, Wines, etc. come under the category of fermented liquors. The maximum self-generated alcohol content that will be present in a fermented liquor, which is not fortified is only 12% by volume. Because when alcohol reaches this volume, the yeast responsible for the fermentation is destroyed by its own bye-product and no further alcohol formation is possible.
9. Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of Chapter X contained in volume II of the Manual read as under:
4. The toddy yield from each kind of tree and the alcoholic strength of toddy varies according to the season of the year, the time during which it is drawn and other attendant circumstances. The daily average yield for Excise Departmental purposes may be taken as 1 1/2 litres per coconut tree, 4 1/2 litres per palmyrah tree and 6 3/4 litres per sago tree.
5. Alcoholic fermentation of toddy which is self generated by the action of wild yeasts starts in the collecting pot itself and this continues for a limited period - say a maximum period of 3 days. Subsequent to this, bacterial (acetic) fermentation starts, bringing down the alcohol content. The bacteria and pseudo yeasts are responsible for the rather strong smell of toddy and the acidity developed. If toddy is left over a period of time. (without even any other foreign matter being added to it), alcohol content comes down and acetic acid is formed and this is how vinegar (Acetic Acid) is manufactured in many of the parts of Kerala. At the peak point of fermentation, the average alcoholic strength of fermented toddy may be taken as follows:
Coconut - 8.1% by volume
Palmyrah - 5.2% by volume
Date - 4.9% by volume
Sago - 5.9% by volume
6. Toddy is claimed to be having considerable nutritive value and is rich in sugars and vitamins. It is also claimed that "Toddy improves the quality of blood and supplies the necessary vitamins for all the organs, nerves and tissues of the body, that it is good diuretic and has been utilized effectively in cases of Lithasis, that it is preventive for the occasional diseases, such as silicosis and pneumoconiosis which is a fibrous of the lungs caused by the inhalation of silicious particles of dust of grit". It can be consumed in reasonable amounts without harm to the system.
10. In State of Kerala and Ors. v. Maharashtra Distilleries Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0364/2005 : (2005) 11 SCC 1, the history of the said Act and its subsequent amendments were noticed by a Constitution Bench of this Court.
11. On obtaining samples of toddy taken from the business premises of the licensees, it was, inter alia, found that ethyl contained therein was 9.50% v/v. They were prosecuted under Section 57(a) of the Act.
12. It is not in dispute that if a prosecution is instituted under Section 57(a) of the Act, renewal of the licence shall not be granted, whereas renewal of the licence would not be a bar if the licensee is prosecuted under Section 56 thereof.
13. Writ petitions were filed inter alia, questioning the validity or otherwise of Rule 9(2) of the Rules and/or applicability of Section 57(a) of the Act, in the event sample of toddy was found to be exceeded 8.1%.
14. A learned Single Judge of the Kerala High Court by a judgment and order dated 31-03-2003 held the said rules to be ultra vires. The learned Single Judge, however, did not consider it necessary to go into the question of interpretation of the two penal provisions viz. Section 56(b) and Section 57(a) of the Act. The criminal proceedings as against the licensee were quashed. In an intra-court appeal, the Division Bench, however, upheld the validity of Rule 9(2) of the Rules, opining that it had not imposed any condition which was unworkable and/or was impossible to be performed. Upon construction of Section 56(b) and Section 57(a), it was opined that having regard to the fact that ethyl alcohol is an essential component or ingredient of toddy, only because percentage of ethyl alcohol found to be more, it would not amount to addition of a foreign ingredient as envisaged under Section 57(a) of the Act. It was, therefore, held:
In the result, the challenge against the vires of Rule 9(2) of the Abkari Shops (Disposal in Auction) Rules, 2002 is repelled. Prosecution proceedings against the Respondents under Section 56(b) of the Abkari Act are not liable to be declared illegal. Proceedings to prosecute the Respondents under Section 57(a) of the Act are quashed.
15. The Division Bench of the High Court in subsequent cases followed its earlier orders.
16. Both the licensees as also the State of Kerala are before us.
17. Mr. K.N. Bhat, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the State, would submit that the provisions of Section 57(a), in view of its purport and object must receive a purposive construction as even in a case of fermentation; once the percentage of ethyl alcohol is found to be in excess of the permissible limit, the same would amount to addition of foreign material so as to attract the provision of Section 57(a) of the Act. Strong reliance, in this behalf, has been placed on S. Sundaram Pillai and Ors. etc. v. V.R. Pattabiraman and Ors. etc. MANU/SC/0387/1985 : (1985) SCC 591.
18. The Learned Counsel would further more submit that the law must receive strict interpretation where adulteration of an edible commodity is alleged. Reliance, in this behalf, has been placed on Bhagwan Das Jain v. State of Punjab : (1993) Supp. 3 SCC 736.
19. The Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of Respondents, on the other hand, would submit that Rule 9(2) should have been declared ultra vires as it is unworkable. It was urged that there does not exist any mechanical equipment to measure the contents of ethyl alcohol in toddy. Even the Excise Department, it was contended, did not have any facility in this behalf and each sample is sent to the laboratory for chemical analysis.
20. Excise Manual has been made by the State of Kerala itself. It is presumed to have been prepared upon making scientific studies. It has defined 'fermented liquor', which states that the maximum self-generated alcohol content that would be present in a fermented liquor, which is not fortified, is only 12% by volume. It is not the case of the State that the licensees had added any foreign material. Paragraph 5 occurring in Chapter X of the Excise Manual, however, provides that average alcoholic strength of fermented toddy may be taken as follows:
Coconut 8.1 % by volume
Palmyrah: 5.2% "
Date: 4.9% "
Sago: 5.9% "
(Emphasis supplied)
21. It, therefore, does not rule out the possibility of fermented toddy containing ethyl alcohol of more 8.1 % v.v. It is accepted that the fermentation is a natural process. No scientific data is available on records, nor the State could furnish any information as to how much time would it require for toddy to become fermented which would contain more than 8.1 % of ethyl alcohol. Toddy, as noticed herein before, has been defined in Section 3(8) of the Act, to. include fermented or unfermented juice drawn, from coconut tree.
22. Rule 9(2) of the said Rules, in our opinion, should be given a plain meaning. It should be read in its entirety. It is in two parts. The intention of the legislature must be gathered having regard to the expressions used therein. Rule 9(2) read in its entirety, states the context that thereby what is essentially sought to be prevented is adulteration of toddy. It is aimed at prevention of adulteration. The penal provision contained in first part not only directs that all toddy kept or offered for sale should be of good quality and unadulterated but also provides that nothing shall be added to it to increase its intoxicating power or for any other purpose. If the second part prescribing the contents of the ethyl alcohol in toddy is read in the context of the first part vis-a-vis Section 57(a) of the Act, it would be evident that prohibition is aimed at adulteration by addition of any foreign substance to increase its intoxicating power or for any other purpose.
23. Validity of Rule 9(2), therefore, can be saved if the said provision is read in its entirety and rule of harmonious construction is resorted to. If, however, Rule 9(2) is sought to be invoked even for the purpose of initiating a prosecution as against a licensee even he does not add any foreign substance to it, the same, in our opinion, would render the same ultra vires, as would appear from the discussions made hereinafter.
24. It is in dispute that there does not exist any mechanical devise to measure the contents of ethyl alcohol present in toddy. It also stands admitted that contents of ethyl alcohol in toddy would depend upon various factors including weather, season or pot in which it is kept etc.
25. Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that each village would not have a chemical laboratory where the process of analysis of ethyl alcohol can be carried out. For example, if a sample is taken in a village, by the time sample is sent for and is analyzed, the volume of ethyl alcohol may increase. Although we are informed that some chemical is mixed when a sample is taken, no material has been placed in that behalf.
26. The validity or otherwise of Rule 9.2 must be considered from this point of view.
27. The constitutionality of a statute is presumed in view of the principles laid down in 'ut rest magis valeat quam pareat'.
28. The principles on which constitutionality of a statute is judged and that of a subordinate legislation are different.
29. We have noticed the definition of 'toddy'. It does not limit the extent of fermentation. Fermented toddy would, therefore, come within the purview of definition of toddy. Manufacture and sale of toddy, which is fermented, is not prohibited. Excise Manual clearly points out that the contents of ethyl alcohol by reason of fermentation in toddy can go upto 12%, whereafter only it ceases to be a toddy. While laying down the norms in Excise Manual, the State had used the words 'average yield'. The percentage specified therein, thus, is only average.
30. If by reason of the rule making power, the State intended to impose a condition, the same was required to be reasonable one. It was required to conform to the provisions of the statute as its violation would attract penal liability. It was expected to be definite and not vague. Indisputably, the State having regard to the provisions of Article 47 of the Constitution of India, must strive hard to maintain public health. While however, imposing conditions in regard to the prescription of norms, it was expected of the State to undertake a deeper study in the matter. It should have undertaken actual experiments. It should have specified mode and manner in which the percentage of ethyl alcohol can be found out by the licensee. A subordinate legislation can be questioned on various grounds. It is also well-known that a subordinate legislation would not enjoy the same degree of immunity as a legislative act would. [See Vasu Dev Singh and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8630/2006 : 2006 (11) SCALE 108].
31. In Kerala Samsthana Chethu Thozhilali Union v. State of Kerala and Ors. MANU/SC/1654/2006 : (2006) 4 SCC 327, this Court while interpreting the provisions of the same Act, opined:
The Rules in terms of Sub-section (1) of Section 29 of The Act, thus, could be framed only for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Act. Both the power to frame rules and the power to impose terms and conditions are, therefore, subject to the provisions of the Act. They must conform to the legislative policy. They must not be contrary to the other provisions of the Act. They must not be framed in contravention of the constitutional or statutory scheme.
Furthermore, the terms and conditions which can be imposed by the State for the purpose of parting with its right of exclusive privilege more or less have been exhaustively dealt with in the illustrations in Sub-section (2) of Section 29 of the Act. There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the general power to make rules is contained in Sub-section (1) of Section 29. The provisions contained in Sub-section (2) are illustrative in nature. But, the factors enumerated in Sub-section (2) of Section 29 are indicative of the heads under which the statutory framework should ordinarily be worked out.