MANU/SC/0086/1974
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 1385 and 1542 of 1974 and Writ Petition No. 442 of 1974
Decided On: 19.11.1974
Appellants:State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:Pradip Tandon and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.N. Ray, C.J., K.K. Mathew and N.L. Untwalia, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Yogeshwar Prasad, S.K. Bagga, S. Bagga, Jagdeep Kishore, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: Niren De and O.P. Rana. Advs. For respondent No. 1.
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 14; CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 15, CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 16(4), CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 29, CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 41, CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 46
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 15(1), Constitution Of India - Article 15(4), Constitution Of India - Article 16(4), Constitution Of India - Article 29, Constitution Of India - Article 29(2), Constitution Of India - Article 41, Constitution Of India - Article 46
Disposition:
Appeal Partly Allowed
Cases Referred:
Beryl F. Carroll v. Greenwich Insurance Co. of New York, 50 L Ed 246; Weaver v. Palmer Bros. Co., 70 L Ed 754; West Coast Hotel co. v. Ernest Parrish, 81 L Ed 703; D.P. Joshi v. State of M.P. and Anr. MANU/SC/0012/1955; R. Chitralekha and Anr. v. State of Mysore and Ors. MANU/SC/0030/1964; D.K. Chanchala v. State of Mysore and Ors. etc. MANU/SC/0040/1971
Cases Overruled / Reversed: 
Subash Chandra v State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors., MANU/UP/0105/1973; Dilip Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors., MANU/UP/0207/1973; Pradip Tandon vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors., MANU/UP/0001/1975
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  9

Dissented
  1

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  4

Case Note:

Constitution - reservation - Article 15 of Constitution of India - whether instructions made by State in making reservations in favour of candidates from rural areas and Uttrakhand Constitutionally valid - contention of State that reservation for rural and Uttakhand areas were for socially and educationally backward classes - Article 15 (1) forbids discrimination only on ground of religion, race or caste - but when classification takes recourse to caste as one of criteria in determining socially and educationally backward classes then expression 'classes' in that case violates rule of unius est exclusio alterius - socially and educationally backward classes of citizens are groups other than groups based on caste - therefore reservation for rural areas cannot be upheld because there is no classification based on residence between students coming from within State and others from somewhere else.
JUDGMENT
A.N. Ray, C.J.
1. The principal question for consideration in these Civil Appeals and Writ Petition is whether the instructions framed by the State in making reservations in favour of candidates from Rural Areas, Hill Areas and Uttrakhand are Constitutionally valid. These reservations were made by the State Government for admission of students to medical colleges in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
2. In Civil Appeal No. 1542 of 1974 the instructions for the combined pre-medical test for the year 1973 were impeached. The instructions for the combined pre medical test 1973 for admission to 7 medical colleges in Uttar Pradesh under the Meerut University provided for reservation of 117 seats for rural areas, 25 seats for hill areas and 25 seats for Uttrakhand area. The total number of seats in the 7 colleges is 782. 392 seats are open to candidates under general category. There are reservations for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, children of political sufferers and children of army personnel. The reservations for rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas were challenged as unconstitutional.
3. In Civil Appeal No. 1385 of 1973 the combined pre-medical test for admission to 5 medical collets at Allahabad. Kanpur, Meerut, Agra and Jhansi for the year 1971 was challenged. The total number of seats was 758. 26 seats were reserved for the nominees of the Government of India under various heads. 732 seats were available to be filled in through the combined pre-medical test 368 seats were open to general competition. 89 seats were reserved for rural areas, 23 seats for hill areas and 23 seats for Uttrakhand Division. The reservations for the rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas were challenged as unconstitutional.
4. The contention on behalf of the State was that the reservations for rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas are for socially and educationally backward classes. It was also said that these reservations are valid on geographical or territorial basis.
5. The affidavit evidence on behalf of the State was this. The Government in the years 1952 and 1953 made reservations for Kisan and hill area candidates. The Government reviewed the position from time to time. The reservations are considered necessary to attract graduates from those areas which are otherwise handicapped in the matter of education. It is necessary to feed the dispensaries with medical men in adequate number to serve the people inhabiting those areas. The rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas lack educational facilities. People living there are illiterate or have a very modest education. Their economic condition is unsatisfactory. The level of income is low. There is acute poverty. There is lack and in some cases total absence of communication and transportation. Historically these areas have been neglected. People living in those areas are socially backward. The percentage of education among them is low. Candidates from those areas on account of various difficulties and handicaps cannot generally compete on parallel or equal footing with other candidates. The State maintains and financially supports the medical colleges. The State can. therefore, claim to lay down the criterion for admission to those colleges. The State classified these rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas as socially and educationally backward areas.
6. The affidavit evidence on behalf of the candidate at the combined pre-medical test is that candidates belonging to reserved categories obtained admission although they secured marks as low as 128 and other candidates were placed in the waiting list although the marks obtained by them was as low as 103. In the general category candidates in the waiting list secured about 266 marks. (See petition in Civil Appeal No. 1542 of 1974). In Civil Appeal No. 1385 of 1973 it was alleged that the candidates from rural Scheduled Castes, Uttrakhand and Hill areas who obtained admission obtained 281, 298 and 163 marks respectively whereas the petitioner in that case obtained 288 marks and could not obtain admission because of reservation of seats;
7. The High Court at Allahabad upheld the reservation for rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas in Subhash Chandra v. State of U.P. MANU/UP/0105/1973 : AIR1973All295 . The High Court struck down the aforesaid reservation in the case of Dilip Kumar v. state of U.P. MANU/UP/0207/1973 : AIR1973All592 . The High Court in the case of Dilip Kumar (supra) however did not consider the case of Subhash Chandra which was an earlier decision. It is desirable from the point of view of judicial propriety to refer to earlier decisions of the same High Court.
8. The contentions of the Attorney General were under two broad heads. First, the State has given sufficient material which remains uncontradicted to show that the areas concerned consisted of people who were as a class socially and educationally backward. Among the factors given by the Government were the factors recognised by the Court in determining socially and educationally backward classes. These were poverty, nature of occupation, place of residence, lack of education and also the sub-standard education of the candidates for the test in comparison to the average standard of candidates from general category. Second, the classification has not been made only on the basis of place of birth as is evident from the State affidavit. If this classification be neither within the vice of Article 15(1) or Article 29(2) then the classification of rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas can be justified on the basis of reasonable sources for the purpose of admission to medical colleges. The sources are the rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas which form geographical or territorial basis.
9. The Attorney General put in the forefront the object of the classification to be the advancement of medical education for candidates from reserved areas. He amplified his submissions as follows. It is a notorious fact that rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas are socially backward because of extreme poverty. These areas are also educationally backward because the standard of literacy is poor and there is lack of educational facilities. There is dearth of doctors in these reserved areas. It is necessary to attract students from these areas for admission to medical colleges. This will give impetus to students from these areas to equip themselves as doctOrs.
10. The Attorney General submitted that the object of classification is to give students from rural areas benefit of medical education. If the object is to get the best material then it would be justifiable to look at the historically backward rural areas which have no medical colleges. The classification may be supported either on historical or geographical exigencies of circumstances. The geographical, territorial, historical and the economic conditions in the rural and hill areas were emphasised to support the classification.
11. The Attorney General laid considerable stress on the feature that Rural India is socially and educationally backward by reason of poverty. He said that the Court should take judicial notice of the extreme poverty in these areas. The rural people were said to have common traits of agriculture and they were all conditioned by economic poverty. Articles 41 and 46 were put in the forefront that the right to education was one of the provisions in the Directive Principles of State Policy. The State is to promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people.
12. Article 15(1) states that the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex place of birth or any of them. The Attorney General submitted that the reservation was not on grounds only of place of birth or caste. Article 29(2) states that no citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, language or any of them. It is said by the Attorney General that inasmuch as place of birth is not mentioned in Article 29(2), the reservations in the present case-would not offend Article 29(2). The Attorney General submitted that the reservations in the present case were not on ground of place of birth but on ground of residence, and, therefore, the reservations would not fall within the mischief of either Article 15(1) or Article 29(2).
13. Article 15(4) was added by the Constitution First Amendment Act, 1951. The object of the amendment was to bring Articles 15 and 29 in line with Article 16(4). Article 16(4) states that nothing in that Article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State is not adequately represented in the services under the State. In the State of Madras v. Smt. Champakam Dorairajan MANU/SC/0007/1951 : [1951]2SCR525 the reservation of seats for non-Brahmins, backward Hindus, Brahmins, Harijans, Anglo Indians and Indian Christians and Muslim was held to offend Article 15(1) and 29(2). This Court pointed out that the omission of a clause like Article 16(4) from Article 29 indicated the intention of the Constitution makers not to introduce communal consideration in matters of admission to educational institutions.
14. Article 15(4) speaks of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens. The State described the rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas as socially and educationally backward areas. The Constitution does not enable the State to bring socially and educationally backward areas within the protection of Article 15(4). The Attorney General however submitted that the affidavit evidence established the rural, hill and Uttrakhand areas to have socially and educationally backward classes of citizens. The backwardness contemplated under Article 15(4) is both social and educational Article 15(4) speaks of backwardness of classes of citizens. The accent is on classes of citizens. Article 15(4) also speaks of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Therefore, socially and educationally backward classes of citizens in Article 15(4) could not be equated with castes. In M. R. Balaji and Ors. v. State of Mysore MANU/SC/0080/1962 : [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 439 and State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr. v. P. Sagar MANU/SC/0028/1968 : [1968]3SCR595 this Court held that classification of backwardness on the basis of castes would violate both Articles 15(1) and 15(4).