MANU/SC/7932/2007
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 1938, 1940, 1941, 1942, 1944, 1946, 1947, 1949, 1950, 1952, 1954, 1955, 1957, 1958 and 1960 of 2007
Decided On: 18.09.2007
Appellants: State of Tamil Nadu
Vs.
Respondent: Seshachalam
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and H.S. Bedi, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: M.S. Ganesh, Sr. Adv., V.G. Pragasam, S. Joseph Aristotle and S. Prabhu Ramasubramanian, Advs caveat or-in-perso
Subject: Service
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 16(1)
Cases Referred:
State of Himachal Pradesh and Anr. v. Kailash Chand Mahajan and Ors. MANU/SC/0239/1992; Government of West Bengal v. Tarun K. Roy and Ors. MANU/SC/0945/2003; U.P. Jal Nigam and Anr. v. Jaswant Singh and Anr. MANU/SC/5073/2006; New Delhi Municipal Council v. Pan Singh and Ors. MANU/SC/7203/2007; K.S. Krishnaswamy etc. v. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/8698/2006; Bannari Amman Sugars Ltd. v. Commercial Tax Officer and Ors. MANU/SC/0994/2004; Shrijee Sales Corporation and Anr. v. Union of India MANU/SC/1099/1997; Pawan Alloys and Casting Pvt. Ltd. Meerut etc. etc. v. P.P. State Electricity Board and Ors. AIR 1997 SC 3810; Sales Tax officer and Anr. v. Shree Durga Oil Mills and Anr. 1998 (1) SCC 573; Southern Petrochemical Industries Co. Ltd. v. Electricity Inspector and E.T.I.O. and Ors. MANU/SC/2333/2007; State of A.P. and Anr. v. A.P. Pensioners' Association and Ors. MANU/SC/2516/2005; Union of India and Anr. v. Manik Lal Banerjee MANU/SC/3283/2006; R.L. Marwaha v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0682/1987; The State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar (1952) 3 SCR 284; Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway Co. v. W. H. Ellis 165 U.S. 150; State of Jammu & Kashmir v. Shri Triloki Nath Khosa and Ors. MANU/SC/0401/1973; U.P. Raghavendra Acharya and Ors. v. State of Karnataka and Ors. MANU/SC/8171/2006
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.04.2006 of the High Court of Judicature at Madras in Writ Petition No. 7971 of 2004
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  4

Distinguished
  4

Mentioned
  9

Ratio Decidendi:
"Classification - Classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia and differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the Act. "
Case Note:
(1)Constitution of India - Article 14-Employment-Claim of benefits-Delay and laches-Filing of representations alone would not save limitation-Delay and laches on part of Government servant-May deprive him of benefit given to others-Article 14 would not be attracted-As law leans in favour of those who are alert and vigilant-Opinion of High Court that relevant G.O.Ms. gave fresh lease of life having regard to legitimate expectation-Based on wrong premise-Legitimate expectation is part of principle of natural justice-No fresh right can be created by invoking doctrine of legitimate expectation-By reason thereof, only existing right saved subject, of course to provisions of statute.
(2)Employment - Benefits of notification-Notification showing that it was meant to be applied to existing employees only-Additional benefits accorded by notification-Persons not fulfilling condition of notification-Could not claim any benefit thereunder.
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. These appeals involving identical questions of law and fact were taken up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2. Respondents herein have been working in the Secretariat of the Government of Tamil Nadu. Each and every department in the Government Secretariat prior to 1961 had a separate unit for appointment, promotion etc. The State, however, amended the Special Rules in the year 1961 whereby all the departments in the Secretariat were made the "one unit" for the purpose of appointment and promotion. Appointments in the Secretariat at all entry level posts, i.e., Junior Assistants (subsequently re-designated as Assistants), Assistants (subsequently re-designated as Assistant Section Officers), Typist/Personal Clerks were to be made from the common list of candidates selected by the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission. Promotion to different higher posts in different departments was also being made from amongst those employees. The Government of Tamil Nadu, however, by issuing G.O.Ms. No. 1290 dated 05.06.1970 excluded the Finance and Law Departments from the "one unit" system. Whereas posts in the cadre of Assistants, Assistant Section Officers, Typists/Personal Clerks continued to be filled up from the common list of candidates, but in Finance and Law Departments, further promotions were effected from amongst the employees allotted thereto only. Appointments to Finance Department, however, were made at random and probably in terms of the option exercised by any particular candidate. Many persons, who have, thus, been ranking higher were employed in "one unit" departments whereas some of the candidates ranking lower were employed under fortuitous circumstances in the Finance Department. The employees working in the Finance Department, therefore, obtained promotions much ahead of their peers or even seniors who were discharging their duties in other departments coming within the "one unit".
3. G.O.Ms. No. 3288 (Public Services Department) was thereafter issued on 29.10.1971 specifying Finance and Law Departments as separate units from the level of Superintendent (Section Officer) and above. Admittedly, however, Rule 4 of the Special Rules of the Tamil Nadu Secretariat Service was amended in that behalf. The said policy, however, is said to have been implemented. Two employees, S. Kalaiselvan and S. Sivasubramanian, filed an Original Application before the Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal in the year 1990 claiming promotion and scale of pay at par with those who were working in the Finance Department and who were said to be juniors to them but had been promoted to higher posts in Finance Department. The said Original Application was allowed by the Tribunal by an order dated 16.4.1993 opining that there existed no guidelines to allot any employee to the Finance Department, vis-a-vis, other departments and, thus, the employees working in other departments could not have been deprived of the benefit of promotion. It was furthermore pointed out that even Rule 4 of the Special Rules for the Tamil Nadu Secretariat Service had not been amended by the said GOMs No. 1290 dated 05.06.1970.
4. The Government of Tamil Nadu thereafter amended the Service Rules with retrospective effect from 05. 06.1970 by issuing G.O.Ms. No. 30 Personnel and Administrative Reforms (D) Department dated 28.1.1994. Upon issuance of the said Government Order, an application for review was filed but the same was dismissed by the Tribunal by an order dated 30.1.1995. The Government was thereafter advised to implement the order of the Tribunal by giving promotion to the concerned employees with retrospective effect from the date on which their juniors had been promoted as Assistant Section Officers in the Finance Department. Sanction was also accorded for creation of two supernumerary posts, namely, posts of Assistant Section Officers in the respective departments. Several representations thereafter were made by persons said to be similarly situated claiming promotion and parity in the scale of pay as compared to their counterparts in the Finance Department. A large number of Original Applications were also filed before the Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal. Upon consideration of various pros and cons, the Government of Tamil Nadu issued a GOM bearing No. 126 dated 29.5.1998, relevant paragraphs whereof read as under:
10. The Government accordingly direct that:
(i) the pay of the seniors in One Unit who have been recruited to the Tamil Nadu Secretariat Service on or before 28.1.1994, shall be stepped up on par with their juniors in the Finance unit by upgrading the posts held by them to the Scale of pay applicable to the juniors with immediate effect.
(ii) The stepping up of their pay on par with the juniors in the Finance Unit by upgrading the posts held by them to the scale of pay applicable to the junior ordered in sub-para (1) above is purely a person-oriented upgradation and no new posts will be created for this purpose.
(iii) The upgradation sanctioned for the seniors will lapse in the event of the retirement of the individuals concerned or their promotion to the upgraded post in their normal turn.
(iv) The pay of the other seniors in the One Unit in the same cadre will be stepped up on par with immediate juniors in the Finance Unit, with effect from the date of issue of this order.
(v) In respect of the Typists/Personal Clerks/Personal Assistants, in One Unit who have not relinquished their right for promotion as Assistant Section Officer, and are still awaiting their turn for promotion as Assistant Section Officer, their pay shall be upgraded to Assistant Section Officer scale on par with their immediate junior in the Finance Unit who got his promotion as Assistant Section Officer.
11. The benefits of upgradation of pay of the seniors on par with their juniors as per Commission's Seniority list ordered in sub-paras (i) to (iv) of Para 10 above, shall also be extended to those seniors in the Finance Unit who were recruited before 28.1.1994 and or drawing less pay than their juniors in One Unit.
12. The upgradation ordered above is subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) The upgradation ordered will involve only stepping up of pay of the senior on par with his junior in the upgraded scale of pay.
(2) It does not entitle him to any claim for arrears of pay.
X X X
These orders shall come into force with effect from the date of issue of the orders.
13. ...
14. The Departments of Secretariat concerned shall issue necessary orders for upgradation of posts and for stepping-up of the pay of the Seniors in One Unit in the upgraded scales ordered in para 10 above, after obtaining necessary individual undertaking in the format enclosed from the seniors concerned to the effect that they accept the terms and conditions of this order.
5. The said Government Order further stipulated that undertaking should be given by the seniors getting upgradation of their pay with their juniors in the Finance Department in the format enclosed to the effect that they accept the terms and conditions thereto. Respondents before us, save and except R. Ragothaman in CA No. 1955 of 2007 indisputably had retired much prior to issuance of the said Government Order dated 29.5.1998. They also made representations before the appellant demanding fixation of their pay at par with their juniors in the Finance Department. As the said request was not acceded to, a large number of original applications were filed before the Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal. By a common judgment pronounced on 20.1.2004, the Tribunal dismissed the said applications opining that the same were barred by limitation. It was held that the applicants having retired long back and having filed applications between 1998 to 2003 and the promoters having retired as Under Secretaries, Deputy Secretaries and Joint Secretaries and in some cases as Additional Secretaries, they should have raised the dispute long back when their juniors had been given promotions in the Finance Department and as the original applications were filed after 20 years, the same could not be entertained.
6. Aggrieved by the said order of the Tribunal, respondents filed writ petitions before the High Court of Judicature at Madras. By reason of the impugned judgment dated 21.4.2006, a Division Bench of the High Court, inter alia, held that the cause of action for filing the original application arose only upon issuance of GOMS No. 126 dated 29.5.1998 and in that view of the matter it cannot be said that the original applications filed by the respondents suffered from delay and latches and/or otherwise barred by limitation as GOMS No. 126 applied also in respect of those who had retired before 29.5.1998. It was also opined that the respondents who had not been in service on or before 28.1.1994 came within the scope and ambit of the said GOMs. Although GOMs 126 provided for operation with prospective effect and by reason thereof past benefits were not made available, the same should be construed in consonance with the provisions contained in Article 14 of the Constitution of India, holding:
There is no specific clause in G.O.Ms. No. 126 excluding the applicability of this G.O. to the persons who had retired before 29.5.1998. The G.O. itself recites that the Government wanted to provide a solution to the long standing problem and had decided to take a sympathetic view to effect lasting and equitable solution to the long standing issue so as to redress the grievances of the seniors in the One Unit by upgrading the pay of the seniors in One Unit on par with their immediate juniors in the Finance Unit.
Keeping in view the explicit intention of the Government, it is apparent that the G.O. had been issued as a beneficial measure and the provisions in such G.O. are to be liberally construed so as to benefit the employees for whose benefit the G.O. was avowedly issued. It is not disputed that the petitioners were in service on and before 28.1.1994 and therefore, they fall within the scope and ambit of the impugned G.O. Once they are covered under the said G.O., the benefit of the said G.O. will flow automatically.
It was further held that the said Government Order applied not only to the existing staff but also to the retired employees and as such a beneficial interpretation to the said Government Order should be given as the said provisions have to be read in consonance with Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
7. Mr. M.S. Ganesh, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, would submit that the High Court committed a serious error in passing the impugned judgment in so far as it failed to take into consideration that:
(i) no explanation was offered by the respondents for not preferring there claim petitions prior to or immediately after the announcement of the order dated 16.04.1993;
(ii) the High Court committed serious error in interfering with the finding of fact arrived at by the Tribunal;
(iii) doctrine of legitimate expectation does not postulate conferment of any right which has been lost for any reason whatsoever; and
(iv) as in terms of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution, no employee has any fundamental right of promotion, upgradation, allocation of any particular department or to receive any benefit after superannuation the impugned judgment is unsustainable.
8. Mr. Venkataramani, Dr. A.E. Chelliah, senior counsel appearing on behalf of respondents and caveat or-in-person on the other hand contended that:
(i) from the perusal of the order of Tribunal dated 16.04.1993, it would appear that observations made therein were not confined only to the two employees who had filed the original application but covered the cases of all others similarly situated;
(ii) having regard to the fact that the State was required to respond comprehensively to the said observations and that the review application filed by the State in view of the said order has been dismissed, before issuing the GOMs No. 126 dated 29.5.1998, the State must be held to have considered the ground realities as also the plight of those employees who had suffered discrimination, irrespective of the fact as to whether they were in service or had retired.
(iii) GOMs No. 126 dated 29.5.1998 must be given effect to for stepping up the scale of pay of the employees to bring them at par with their juniors in the Finance Department with the object of treating all the employees equally;
(iv) no new right having been created by GOMs No. 126 dated 29.5.1998, any mini classification or micro classification would offend Article 14 of the Constitution of India as there was no rational object behind the same and it is not possible to segregate the cases of the employees in service vis-a-vis the retired employees.
9. The employees of the Finance and Law Departments were being treated differently from a long time. The respondents herein never questioned the purported different treatment meted out to them by the State either by making representations or by filing any application before the Central Administrative Tribunal. Only two of the employees did. Their applications were allowed, inter alia, on the premise that posting of employees in the Finance and Law Departments took place by way of fortuitous circumstances and were not supported by any rationality. The State, we have noticed hereinbefore, amended the Rules with retrospective effect. The said Rule is still in force. Validity of the said Rule has not been questioned by the respondents. Different treatments meted out to the employees of the Finance and Law Departments vis-a-vis other department is now covered by Rules, but despite the same, the State intended to assuage the feelings of the employees by issuance of the said GOMs No. 126 dated 29.5.1998. The said notification was issued upon considering various factors including pendency of a large number of matters before the Administrative Tribunal on the said issue. The State intended to lay down a policy for providing financial benefits with prospective effect. Various pros and cons therefore were examined. Avenues available to the State were taken to into consideration. Only thereafter it was directed:
The Government, after careful consideration of all these points and also the related issues involved, have decided to take a sympathetic view and attempt a lasting and equitable solution to this long standing issue, so as to redress the grievances of the seniors in the One Unit, by upgrading the pay of the seniors in One Unit on par with their immediate juniors in the Finance Unit.
10. It is one thing to say that the State had come up with a policy decision which is beneficial to all the employees irrespective of the fact as to whether they had reached the age of superannuation or not, the only criteria being that they were recruited to the Tamil Nadu Secretariat Service on or before 28.1.1994 but it is another thing to say that the claim petitions filed by the responders were based on the success of their colleagues before the Administrative Tribunal in the year 1994. The employees working in the Finance Department had been promoted long back. We have noticed hereinbefore that some of them retired as Additional Secretaries whereas the respondents retired as merely Assistants. Presumably, promotions to the employees of the Finance Department were given systematically over a long period of time but no such grievance was made nor any application was filed before the appropriate forum. Such grievance, in our opinion, should have been raised or proper application before the Tribunal should have been filed long long back. It was in the aforementioned situation, the Tribunal was of the opinion that their applications were barred by limitation. Assuming that the cause of action for filing such applications arose in view of the observations made by the Tribunal in its order dated 16.4.1993 passed in Original Application No. 166 of 1990, but then in terms of the Act and the Rules, the respondents were required to file a proper application within a period of one year only. It is borne out from the records that, in fact, 62 such applications were already pending when GOMs No. 126 was issued.