MANU/SC/1177/2015
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 4267 of 2015 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 11215 of 2015)
Decided On: 15.10.2015
Appellants: Sumer Builders Pvt. Ltd.
Vs.
Respondent: Narendra Gorani
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dipak Misra and Prafulla C. Pant, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Shekhar Naphade, Sr. Adv., Yasmin Bhansali, Pratap Venugopal, Supriya Jain, Gaurav Nair and Niharika, Advs. for K J. John & Co.
For Respondents/Defendant: Shyam Divan, Sr. Adv., Vijay Tulsiyan, R.S. Bobde, Hamed Kadiani and Kush Chaturvedi, Advs.
Subject: Arbitration
Subject: Property
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
Arbitration And Conciliation Act, 1996 - Section 9
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 - Section 9, Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 - Section 36; Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 - Section 13; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 16, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 17, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 20, Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 120
Cases Referred:
Moolji Jaitha and Co. v. Khandesh Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. MANU/FE/0007/1950 : AIR 1950 FC 83; Shiv Bhagwan Moti Ram Saraoji v. Onkarmal Ishar Dass and Ors. MANU/MH/0103/1952 : AIR 1952 Bom. 365; Adcon Electronics Pvt. Ltd. v. Daulat and Anr. MANU/SC/0550/2001 : (2001) 7 SCC 698; P.M.A. Velliappa Chettiar v. Saha Govinda Doss MANU/TN/0077/1928 : AIR 1929 Mad. 721; Debendra Nath Chowdhury v. Southern Bank Ltd. MANU/WB/0170/1960 : AIR 1960 Cal. 626; Excel Dealcomm Pvt. Ltd. v. Asset Reconstruction Co. (India) Ltd. MANU/SC/0384/2015 : (2015) 8 SCC 219; Indian Mineral and Chemicals Co. v. Deutsche Bank MANU/SC/0525/2004 : (2004) 12 SCC 376
Case Category:
ARBITRATION MATTERS
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.03.2015 of the Division Bench of the High Court at Bombay in Appeal No. 572 of 2013 in Chamber Summons No. 720 of 2013 in Leave Petition No. 238 of 2013 in Arbitration Petition No. 799 of 2013 (MANU/MH/0374/2015)
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  1

Mentioned
  4

Relied On
  2

Case Note:
Civil - Jurisdiction of Court - Parties entered into an agreement - Development of land - Development agreement contains arbitration clause - MOU entered - Dispute arose - Respondent terminated MOU - Forfeited security deposit - Invoked arbitration clause - Appellant required Respondent to perform - Part of contract - Appellant moved High Court - Grant of leave - Clause 12 of Letters Patent - Application under Section 9, 1996 Act - Courts at Bombay have territorial jurisdiction - Leave granted - Respondent filed application - Prayed revocation of leave - Learned Single Judge revoked leave - Appellant preferred appeal - Division Bench - Declined to interfere with order of learned Single Judge - Present appeal - Whether the High Court was justified in concurring with the view expressed by the learned Single Judge revoking the leave granted by Court under Clause 12 of Letters Patent - Whether in the present case, the application filed under Section 9 of 1996 Act before the High Court of Bombay can be regarded as a money claim

Facts:

The parties to the lis entered into an agreement for development of the land of the Respondent. The Respondent had handed over the vacant possession of the land to enable the Appellant to start the development work. Clause 13 of the development agreement contains an arbitration clause whereby the parties had agreed to refer the matter in respect of any difference or dispute between them with regard to the construction or the terms of the development agreement or with regard to the project undertaken for arbitration.

A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was entered into between the parties, which stipulates that the developer was required construct a township project consisting of one commercial building, 11 residential wings in four buildings and one club house under licence from the Indore Municipal Corporation. It was further agreed that if the MoU was terminated, the developer would not have any right, title or interest in the township project and would be required to remove his employees and machineries from the land. Clause 13 of the developer agreement was also incorporated in the MoU.

As disputes arose with regard to payment, the Respondent terminated the MoU, forfeited the security deposit and invoked the arbitration clause by issuing a notice. The Appellant herein replied to the termination notice by stating that it had carried out substantial construction on the property. It was also stated by the Appellant that the environmental clearance certificate for the project was not obtained by the Respondent and, therefore, further work was stopped. The Appellant required the Respondent to perform his part of the contract in obtaining the requisite environmental clearance, execute irrevocable power of attorney, refund the part of the amount payable and pay interest on the security deposit.

At this stage, the Appellant moved the High Court of Bombay for grant of leave Under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent by filing an application Under Section 9 of the 1996 Act asserting that the courts at Bombay have the territorial jurisdiction, and accordingly leave was granted. The Respondent after entering appearance filed an application praying for revocation of leave. While seeking revocation of leave, it was contended by the Respondent that dispute pertains to the land which is situate at Indore; that the development agreement and the MoU had been executed at Indore where the immoveable property is situated; and that the dispute fundamentally is for right and possession over the land, hence, the court where the land is situated has the territorial jurisdiction in respect of the arbitration or any application to be filed under the 1996 Act.

The learned Single Judge revoked the leave that was earlier granted. Dissatisfied, the Appellant preferred an appeal before the Division Bench. The Division Bench declined to interfere with the order passed by the learned Single Judge. The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and order passed by Division Bench.

Held, while dismissing the appeal

1.The seminal issue is whether on the factual score which has been exposited, the application filed Under Section 9 of the 1996 Act before the High Court of Bombay can be regarded as a money claim. On a studied scrutiny of the agreement and the MoU it is clear as day that the development agreement indubitably had created certain interests in the land in favour of the Appellant. The assertions made in the application along with the relief clause when read in entirety and appreciated in a holistic manner, it becomes luminescent that the core dispute pertains to possession of the land, for the Appellant claims to be in exclusive possession and the Respondent, per contra, has asseverated that it had taken over possession.[33]

2.It can irrefragably be stated that any order passed Under Section 9 of the 1996 Act will have the impact on the land. It is difficult to accede to the submission that it will not conceptually fall within the category of "suit for land" as engrafted Under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent. It is clearly a dispute with regard to the possession which is evincible from the correspondences and the averments made in the application preferred Under Section 9 of the 1996 Act. Thus, there has to be determination as regards possession and impliedly issue of direction for recovery of possession. Hence, the conclusion arrived at by the Division Bench on the basis of the scrutiny of documents that the dispute is embedded with regard to the possession of the land because the fundamental claim pertains to certain constructed space on the land and, therefore, it would conceptually fall within the conception of "suit for land" appearing in Clause 12 of the Letters Patent is unexceptionable.[33]

3.It is difficult to accept the submission that it is a money claim and, therefore, the Bombay High Court would also have the territorial jurisdiction and accordingly the Court unhesitatingly repelled the same. Resultantly, the Court found no substance in the appeal and accordingly dismissed the same.[33] and[ 34]

JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, J.
1. The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 10.03.2015 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Appeal No. 572 of 2013 whereby it has concurred with the view expressed by the learned Single Judge in Chamber Summons No. 720/2013 in Arbitration Petition No. 799/2013 dated 10.10.2013 whereunder the learned Single Judge had revoked the leave granted by the court Under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent to file a petition Under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for brevity, "the 1996 Act").
2. The facts which are essential to be stated are that the parties to the lis entered into an agreement on 28.2.2008 for development of the land of the Respondent. As per the said agreement, the Appellant was required to develop a residential project and/or commercial complex and/or multiplex and/or hotels and/or malls etc. as permissible in law. The Respondent had handed over the vacant possession of the land to enable the Appellant to start the development work. Clause 13 of the development agreement contains an arbitration clause whereby the parties had agreed to refer the matter in respect of any difference or dispute between them with regard to the construction or the terms of the development agreement or with regard to the project undertaken for arbitration. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was entered into between the parties, which stipulates that the developer was required construct a township project consisting of one commercial building, 11 residential wings in four buildings and one club house under licence from the Indore Municipal Corporation. It was further agreed that if the MoU was terminated, the developer would not have any right, title or interest in the township project and would be required to remove his employees and machineries from the land. Clause 13 of the developer agreement was also incorporated in the MoU.
3. As disputes arose with regard to payment, the Respondent terminated the MoU, forfeited the security deposit and invoked the arbitration clause by issuing a notice through his Advocate on 6.6.2013. The Appellant herein replied to the termination notice by stating that it had carries out substantial construction on the property by constructing three buildings and by taking many other steps. It was also stated by the Appellant that the environmental clearance certificate for the project was not obtained by the Respondent and, therefore, further work was stopped. The Appellant required the Respondent to perform his part of the contract in obtaining the requisite environmental clearance, execute irrevocable power of attorney, refund the part of the amount payable and pay interest on the security deposit.
4. As the factual matrix would undrape, when arbitration was demanded by the Respondent, the Appellant on 16.7.2013 replied that the arbitration tribunal had to be in Mumbai. It was also put forth that it was in physical possession of the property and its construction material, machinery, office equipments and other equipments were at the site. At this stage, the Appellant moved the High Court of Bombay for grant of leave Under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent by filing an application Under Section 9 of the 1996 Act asserting that the courts at Bombay have the territorial jurisdiction, and accordingly leave was granted. The Respondent after entering appearance filed an application praying for revocation of leave. While seeking revocation of leave, it was contended by the Respondent that dispute pertains to the land which is situate at Indore; that the development agreement and the MoU had been executed at Indore where the immoveable property is situated; and that the dispute fundamentally is for right and possession over the land, hence, the court where the land is situated has the territorial jurisdiction in respect of the arbitration or any application to be filed under the 1996 Act.
5. The learned Single Judge scanned the anatomy of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent and various decisions of the High Court of Bombay and referred to the decision in Moolji Jaitha and Co. v. Khandesh Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. MANU/FE/0007/1950 : AIR 1950 FC 83, adverted to the issue relating to what would constitute cause of action in the obtaining factual matrix, analysed the decision of the Bombay High Court in Shiv Bhagwan Moti Ram Saraoji v. Onkarmal Ishar Dass and Ors. MANU/MH/0103/1952 : AIR 1952 Bom. 365, and referred to Adcon Electronics Pvt. Ltd. v. Daulat and Anr. MANU/SC/0550/2001 : (2001) 7 SCC 698 and eventually came to hold as follows:
...the Petitioner has put up its machinery, staff for the construction and the ultimate construction upon the land. Several buildings have been constructed fully or in part. The parties are entitled to a part of the construction each as per the directions of the development agreement or amount in cash as per the MOU. The development work is in progress. An order for protection of the property pending the arbitration would involve the land itself. The dispute has nothing to do with the rights of the parties in personam only....
And again:
...The disputes in the development agreement are closely connected with the land, the possession of which is disputed by the parties. The suit is a suit for land. It would have to be filed in Indore where the land is situate.
6. Being of this view, the learned Single Judge revoked the leave that was earlier granted. Being dissatisfied with the aforesaid order, the Appellant preferred an appeal before the Division Bench. Before the Division Bench it was contended that the Appellant was in possession of the land and the possession shall remain with it till the completion of the entire project and he was entitled to refund of security deposit.
7. In essence, it was urged that the application preferred Under Section 9 of the 1996 Act was tenable before the High Court of Bombay and there was no justification to revoke the leave. The Division Bench referred to certain clauses of the agreement and the clauses from the MoU and the correspondences between the parties, the assertions made in the Section 9 petition and the relief sought therein, addressed to the import of Clause 12 of the Letters Patent and what meaning had been given to the "suit for land" in Moolji Jaitha (supra) by analyzing various passages, culled out the principles stated in Adcon Electronics (supra), took note of the fact that the development agreement and the MoU had been executed at Indore, the statement of claim and the counter claim filed by the parties before the learned arbitrator who has already entered into reference and in the ultimate eventuality opined thus:
...In the present case, we are of the vie that the disputes between the parties hereto in relation to the development agreement dated 28 February 2008 and the MOU dated 8 June 2012 are of such a nature that they are rooted to the land. The disputes are not such that they relate only to the execution of any document and/or specific performance thereof simplicitor. The disputes relate to possession of the said land which is outside the jurisdiction of the Court as also regarding the percentage of the parties rights, title and interest in the said land and/or their entitlement to a sizable portion of the constructed space thereon. These disputes would certainly fall within the expression "suit for land" appearing in Clause XII of the Letters Patent.
Expressing thus, the Division Bench declined to interfere with the order passed by the learned Single Judge.
8. We have heard Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior Counsel for the Appellant and Mr. Shyam Divan, learned senior Counsel for the Respondent.
9. Criticizing the orders passed by the High Court, it is submitted by Mr. Naphade, learned senior Counsel that the learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench has fallen into serious error in their appreciation of the clauses in the agreement and the relief sought inasmuch as it was a money claim and when the amount was paid at Mumbai, the High Court of Mumbai had the jurisdiction. He has drawn our attention to various clauses in the agreement to which we shall refer to in the course of our delineation. In essence, his submission is that it is basically a claim relating to money and it has nothing to do with the land and, therefore, the analysis made by the High Court is fundamentally fallacious.
10. Mr. Divan, learned senior Counsel appearing for the Respondent countering the aforesaid submissions would contend that the cause of action had arisen at Indore regard being had to the fact that the land is situated at Indore and the agreement in question and the MoU were executed at Indore. It is his further submission that the order passed by the Division Bench is absolutely defensible inasmuch as it is a claim for land and in the backdrop of prayer Under Section 9 of the 1996 Act, there could not have been any other conclusion than what has been expressed by the High Court that it has no territorial jurisdiction to deal with the controversy.
11. To appreciate the controversy, it is appropriate to refer to Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, which reads as follows:
12. Original jurisdiction as to suits-And we do further ordain that the said High Court of Judicature at Bombay, in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, shall be empowered to receive, try and determine suits of every description, if, in the case of suits for land or other immovable property such land or property shall be situated, or in all other cases if the cause of action shall have arisen, either wholly, or in case the leave of the Court shall have been first obtained, in part, within the local limits of the ordinary original jurisdiction of the said High Court, or if the Sefendant at the time of the commencement of the suit shall dwell or carry on business, or personally work for gain, within such limits; except that the said High Court shall not have such original jurisdiction in cases falling within the jurisdiction of the Small Cause Court at Bombay, in which the debt or damage, or value of property sued for does not exceed one hundred rupees.
12. The said clause fell for interpretation in Adcon Electronics (supra), wherein the Court stated thus:
Thus, it is clear that Under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original jurisdiction will have power to receive, try and determine: (1) suits for land or other immovable property if such property is situated within the local limits of original jurisdiction of the High Court; or (2) all other cases (a) if the cause of action has arisen wholly within the local limits of the ordinary original jurisdiction of the High Court; (b) if prior leave of the Court has been obtained and the cause of action has arisen in part within the local limits of the ordinary original jurisdiction of the High Court; or (c) if the Defendant dwells or carries on business or personally works for gain within such limits.
13. Be it noted Under Section 120 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for short, "Code of Civil Procedure"), Sections 16, 17 and 20 are not applicable to the High Court in original civil jurisdiction. Thus, as far as the Bombay High Court is concerned, it is Clause 12 of the Letters Patent that would govern the controversy.
14. In Adcon Electronics (supra), the two-Judge Bench referred to the divergence of opinion in Moolji Jaitha (supra), the Full Bench decision of the High Court of Madras in P.M.A. Velliappa Chettiar v. Saha Govinda Doss MANU/TN/0077/1928 : AIR 1929 Mad. 721, Division Bench judgment of Calcutta High Court in Debendra Nath Chowdhury v. Southern Bank Ltd. MANU/WB/0170/1960 : AIR 1960 Cal. 626 and ruled thus:
From the above discussion it follows that a "suit for land" is a suit in which the relief claimed relates to title to or delivery of possession of land or immovable property. Whether a suit is a "suit for land" or not has to be determined on the averments in the plaint with reference to the reliefs claimed therein; where the relief relates to adjudication of title to land or immovable property or delivery of possession of the land or immovable property, it will be a "suit for land". We are in respectful agreement with the view expressed by Mahajan, J. in Moolji Jaitha case.