MANU/SC/0184/1978
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition No. 2202 and 568 of 1977
Decided On: 30.08.1978
Appellants:Sunil Batra
Vs.
Respondent:Delhi Administration and Ors.
[Alongwith Writ Ptn. No. 565 of 1977]
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Y.V. Chandrachud, C.J., V.R. Krishna Iyer, S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, P.N. Shinghal and D.A. Desai, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Y.S. Chitale, Randhir Jain, M. Mudgal, G.K.B. Choudhury, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: Soli J. SorabjeeAddl. Sol. General, E.C. Agarwala and Girish Chandra, Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Authorities Referred:
"My Years in an Indian Prison-Mary Tyler" (Victor Gallantz Ltd., London 1977). The author, a young British, Mary Tyler; Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Edition, para 1151, Vol. 30; Historical perspectives-Justice, Punishment, Treatment by Leonard Oreland, 1973, p. 144; James C. Coleman-Abnormal Psychology and Modern Life p. 105.; Harry Elmer Barnes and Negley K. Testers-New Horzons in Criminology, 3rd Ed. 2 p. 351-352.; Havelock Ellis, The Criminal, 5th Edn. 1914, p. 327; Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
PRISONS ACT, 1894 - Section 56; PRISONS ACT, 1894 - Section 30
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 365(2); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 366; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 366(1); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 366(2); Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 395; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 401; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 415; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 433; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 434; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 435; Constitution Of India - Article 132, Constitution Of India - Article 134, Constitution Of India - Article 134(c), Constitution Of India - Article 136, Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 161, Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1), Constitution Of India - Article 20, Constitution Of India - Article 20(2), Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 39A, Constitution Of India - Article 42, Constitution Of India - Article 72; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 303; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 379; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 53; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 73; Indian Penal Code 1860, (IPC) - Section 74; Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 29, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 30, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 30(2), Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 45, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 46, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 46(10), Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 46(7), Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 46(8), Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 47, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 56, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 57, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 58, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 59, Prisons Act, 1894 - Section 60
Disposition:
Disposed of
Cases Referred:
Wolf v. McDonnel (1974) 41 L ed 2d 935; Shelton v. Tucker (1960) 364 US 479; Weems v. United States (1909) 54 L Ed 793 : (1909) 217 US 349; R.L. Arora v. State of Uttar Pradesh MANU/SC/0033/1964; Munn v. Illinois (1877) 94 US 113; Trop v. Dulles (1958) 356 US 86, 101; Abdul Azeez v. State of Karnataka MANU/SC/0134/1977; D.K. Sharma v. M.P. State MANU/SC/0109/1975; Sostre v. Rockefeller (1970) 312 F Suppl. 863; Wright v. Machmann 387 F 2nd at 526; Hancock v. Avery; Morrissey v. Brewer (1972) 33 L Ed 2d 484, 505; Furman v. Georgia (1972) 33 L ed 2d 346; State of Maharashtra v. Sindhi MANU/SC/0218/1975; Kharak Singh v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0085/1962; A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras MANU/SC/0012/1950; R.C. Cooper v. Union of India MANU/SC/0074/1970; Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India MANU/SC/0133/1978; Jagmohan Singh v. State of U.P. MANU/SC/0139/1972; Donnel Douglas v. Maurice H. Sigler 386 F 2nd 684; Coffin v. Reichard, Substantive Criminal Law 14; John v. Dys; Hicks (1966) 383 US 252; D. Bhuyan Mohan Patnaik v. State of Andhra Pradesh MANU/SC/0038/1974; Procunier v. Martineg (1974) 40 L Ed 224; Willam King Jackson v. D.E. Bishop 404 F 2d 571; Charles Wolf v. McDonnell (1974) 41 Led 2d 935; Kennneth Grahm v. J.T. Willingham, federal 2d Series Vol. 384, F 2d; State v. Pandurang MANU/SC/0089/1965; Mohammed Giasuddin v. State of A.P. MANU/SC/0108/1977;
Citing Reference:



Discussed
  24

Mentioned
  12

Case Note:
Constitution - Solitary confinement - Sections 30 and 56 of Prisons Act, 1894 - Petitioners-were served with an order of detention - Hence, this Petition - Whether, solitary confinement imposed on Batra was valid - Held, Article 21 forbided deprivation of personal liberty except in accordance with procedure established by law and curtailment of personal liberty to such an extent as to be a negation of it would constitute deprivation - However, Sub-section (2) of Section 30 permitted solitary confinement, when a prisoner under sentence of death - Classification according to sentence for security purposes was valid - Therefore, Section 30(2) did not violate Article 14 and requirements of Section 30(2) did not appear to be unreasonable - Appeal disposed of.

Constitution - Detention - Whether, power conferred on Superintendent by Section 56 was unguided and uncanalised - Held, power to confine in iron could be constitutionalised only if it was hemmed in with severe restrictions - Power under Section 56 could be exercised only for reasons and considerations, which were germane to objective of statute, which took in considerations regarding character and propensities of prisoner - Therefore, putting bar fetters for an unusually long period without due regard for safety of prisoner and security of prison would be not justified under Section 56 - However, there were sufficient guidelines in Section 56 which contained a number of safeguards against misuse of bar fetters by Superintendent - Hence, such circumscribed peripheral discretion with duty to give reasons which were revisable by higher authority could not be violative of Article 14 - Hence, Section 56 was not violative of Article 14 or 21 - Petition disposed of.
Ratio Decidendi:
"A convict is entitled to precious right guaranteed by Article 21."
JUDGMENT
Authored By : V.R. Krishna Iyer, D.A. Desai
V.R. Krishna Iyer, J.
1. The province of prison justice, the conceptualization of freedom behind bars and the role of judicial power as constitutional sentinel in a prison setting, are of the gravest moment in a world of escalating torture by the minions of State, and in India, where this virgin area of jurisprudence is becoming painfully relevant. Therefore, explicative length has been the result; and so it is that, with all my reverence for and concurrence with my learned brethren on the jurisdictional and jurisprudential basics they have indicated, I have preferred to plough a lonely furrow.
The Core-questions.
2. One important interrogation lies at the root of these twin writ petitions : Does a prison setting, ipso facto, out-law the rule of law, lock out the judicial process from the jail gates and declare a long holiday for human rights of convicts in confinement, and (to change the metaphor ) if there is no total eclipse, what lucent segment is open for judicial justice? Three inter-related problems project themselves : (i) a jurisdictional dilemma between 'hands off prisons' and 'take over jail administration' (ii) a constitutional conflict between detentional security and inmate liberties and (iii) the role of processual and substantive reasonableness in stopping brutal jail' conditions. In such basic situations, pragmatic belighted by the Preamble to the Constitution and balancing the vulnerability of 'caged' human to State torment and the prospect of escape or internal disorder, should be the course for the court to navigate.
3. I proceed to lay bare the broad facts, critically examine the legal contentions and resolve the vital controversy which has profound impact on our value system. Freedom is what Freedom does-to the last and the least-Antyodaya.
4. Two petitioners-Batra and Sobraj-one Indian and the other French, one under death sentence and the other facing grave charges, share too different shapes, the sailing and arrows of incarceratory fortune, but instead of submitting to what they describe as shocking jail injustice, challenge, by separate writ petitions, such traumatic treatment as illegal. The soul of these twin litigations is the question, in spiritual terms, whether the prison system has a conscience in constitutional terms, whether a prisoner, ipso facto, forfeits personhood to become a rightless slave of the State and, in cultural terms, whether man-management of prison society can operate its arts by 'zoological' strategies. The grievance of Batra, sentenced to death by the Delhi Sessions Court, is against de facto solitary confinement, pending his appeal, without de jure sanction. And the complaint of Sobraj is against the distressing disablement, by bar fetters, of men behind bars especially of undertrials, and that for unlimited duration, on the ipse dixit of the prison 'brass'. The petitioners, seek to use the rule of law to force open the iron gates of Tihar Jail where they are now lodged, and the Prison Administration resists judicial action, in intra-mural matters as forbidden ground, relying on Sections 30 and 56 of Prisons Act, 1894 (the Act, hereafter). The Petitioners invoke Articles 14, 21 (and 19, in the case of Batra) of the Constitution.
5. The paramount law. Prison discipline and judicial oversight.
6. The jurisdictional reach and range of this Court's writ to hold prison caprice and cruelty in constitutional leash is incontestable, but teasing intrusion into administrative discretion is legal anathema, absent breaches of constitutional rights or prescribed procedures. Prisoners have enforceable liberties devalued may be but not demonetized; and under our basic scheme, Prison Power must bow before judge Power if fundamental freedoms are in jeopardy. The principle is settled, as some American decisions have neatly put it Federal Reporter 2d. Series, Vol. 386, p. 684; Donnel Douglas v. Maurice H. Sigler.
The matter of internal management of prisons or correctional institutions is vested in and rests with the hands of those institutions operating under statutory authority and their acts and administration of prison discipline and overall operation of the institution are not subject to court supervision or control absent most unusual circumstances or absent a violation of a constitutional right. But Corwin notes.
Federal courts have intensified their oversight of State penal facilities, reflecting a heightened concern with the extent to which the ills that plague so-called correctional institution-overcrowding, understaffing, unsanitary facilities, brutality, constant fear of violence, lack of adequate medical and mental health care, poor food service, intrusive correspondence restrictions, inhumane isolation, segregation, inadequate or non-existent rehabilitative and/or educational programs, deficient recreational opportunities-violate the Eighth Amendment ban on "cruel and unusual punishments.
7. The 'hands-off' doctrine is based on the fallacious foundation stated in 1871 in Ruffin v. Commonwealth :
He has, as a consequence of his crime, not only forfeited his liberty, but all his personal rights except those which the law in its humanity accords to him. He is for the time being, the slave of the State 62 v (21 Gratt) 790, 796 (1871).
During the century that followed, the American courts have whittled away at the doctrine and firstly declared in Jordan 257 Fed. Suppl. 674 Jordan v. Fitzharris (N.D. Cal. 1966) that when the responsible prison authorities... have abandoned elemental concepts of decency by permitting conditions to prevail of a shocking and debased nature, then the courts must intervene promptly to restore the primal rules of a civilized community in accord with the mandate of the Constitution of the United States.
8. In Coffin v. Reichard, the court was persuaded to intervene when, while lawfully in custody a prisoner is deprived of some right, the loss of which makes his imprisonment more burdensome than the law permits :
When a man possesses a substantial right, the Courts will be diligent in finding a way to protect it. The fact that a person is legally in prison does not prevent the use of habeas corpus to protect his other inherent rights.
9. In John v. Dys, the Court again held it preferable "that a potentially dangerous individual be set free than the least degree of and impairment of an individual's basic constitutional rights be permitted. Thus, the constitutionality of imprisonment, its duration, and conditions can be validity tested by means of habeas corpus.
10. The harshest blow to the old 'hands-off' doctrines was struck by Manree v. Pepa, 365, US 167, 5 L. Ed. 2d, 492 (1961).
Where the court insisted on "civilized standards of humane decency" and interdicted the subhuman condition which could only serve to destroy completely the spirit and undermine the sanity of the prisoner.
11. By 1975, the United States Supreme Court sustained the indubitable proposition that constitutional rights did not desert convicts but dwindled in scope. A few sharp passages from Eve Pall 417 US 817 41 Ed. 2d. 495 opinions and some telling observations from Charles Wolff 41 L. Ed. 2d. 935 nail the argument that prisoners are non-persons.
12. Mr. Justice Steward, who delivered the opinion of the Court in Eve Pell observed "Courts cannot, of course, abdicate their constitutional responsibility to delineate and protect fundamental liberties. But when the issue involves a regulation limiting one of several means of communication by an inmate, the institutional objectives furthered by that regulation and the measure of judicial deference owed to corrections officials in their attempt to serve these interests are relevant in gauging the validity of the regulation."
13. Mr. Justice Douglas, in his dissenting view, stated "Prisoners are still 'persons' entitled to all constitutional rights unless their liberty has been constitutionally curtailed by procedures that satisfy all the requirements of due process,
(emphasis, added).
14. In the later case of Charles Wolff, the court made emphatic statements driving home the same point. For instance, Mr. Justice White, who spoke for the Court, observed : "Lawful imprisonment necessarily makes unavailable many rights and privileges of the ordinary citizen, a "retraction justified by the considerations underlying our penal system. But though his rights may be diminished by environment; a prisoner is not wholly stripped of constitutional protections when he is imprisoned for crime. There is no Iron curtain drawn between the Constitution and the prisons of this country,... In sum there must be mutual accommodation between institutional needs and objectives and the provisions of the Constitution that are of general application."
15. Mr. Justice Marshall expressed himself explicitly "I have previously stated my view that a prisoner does not shed his basic constitutional rights at the prison gate, and I fully support the court's holding that the interest of inmates in freedom from imposition of serious discipline is a 'liberty' entitled to due process protection."
16. Mr. Justice Douglas, again a dissenter, asserted : "Every prisoner's liberty i.e., of course, circumscribed by the very fact of his confinement, but his interest in the limited liberty left to him is then only the more substantial. Conviction of a crime does not render one a non-person whose rights are subject to the whim of the prison administration, and therefore, the imposition of any serious punishment within the prison system requires procedural safeguards. Of course, a bearing need not be held before a prisoner is subjected to some minor deprivation, such as an evening's loss of television privileges. Placement in solitary confinement, however, is not in that category."
17. I may now crystalise this legal discussion. Disciplinary autonomy, in the hands of mayhem-happy jail staffers, may harry human rights and the wails from behind the high walls will not easily break through the sound-proof, night-proof barrier to awaken the judges' writ jurisdiction. So, it follows that activist legal aid as a pipeline to carry to the court the breaches of prisoners' basic rights is a radical humanist concomitant of the rule of prison law. And in our constitutional order it is axiomatic that the prison laws do not swallow up the fundamental rights of the legally unfree, and, as sentinels on the qui vive, courts will guard freedom behind bars, tampered, of course, by environmental realism but intolerant of torture by executive echelons. The policy of the law and the paramountcy of the Constitution are beyond purchase by authoritarians glibly invoking 'dangerousness' of inmates and peace in prisons.
18. If judicial realism is not to be jettisoned, judicial activism must censor the argument of unaccountable prison autonomy.
19. 'Dangerousness' as a cover for police and prison atrocities is not unusual, as a recent judicial enquiry by Mr. Justice Ismail in a Tamil Nadu prison indicates :
"The black hole of Calcutta is not a historical past but a present reality. The Report finds the detenus were deliberately lodged in the nineth block which was previously occupied by leprosy prisoners.
On the night of February 2, "there were brutal, merciless and savage beatings of the detenus in the nineth block", earlier in the afternoon, the Chief Head Warder went to the block and noted down the names of the detenus and the cells in which they were locked up. The exercise was undertaken. The Judge finds that "the beating of the detenus that took place on the night of February 2, 1976 was a premeditated, pre-planned and deliberate one and not undertaken on the spur of the moment either because of any provocation offered by the detenus to go into the cells as contended by the jail officials"
(Other lurid judicial reports from other States also have appeared.)
20. After all, though the power vests in the Superintendent, it is triggered by the guard. We cannot, without check permit human freedom to be gouged by jail guards under guise of 'encounters' and 'escape attempts'.
21. Mr. Justice Douglas stressed this aspect in Wolff v. Mcdonnel 41 L. Ed. 2d. 935 :
"We have made progress since then but the old tradition still lingers. Just recently an entire prison system of one state was held as inhumane.... The lesson to be learned is that courts cannot blithely defer to the supposed expertise of prison officials when it comes to the constitutional rights of inmates.
"Prisoners often have their privilege revoked, are denied the right of access to counsel, sit in solitary or maximum security or less accrued 'good time' on the basis of a single, unreviewed report of a guard. When the Courts defer to administrative discretion, it is this guard to whom they delegate the final word on reasonable Prison Practices. This is the central evil in prison...the unreviewed discretion granted to the poorly trained personnel who deal directly with prisoners."
22. If wars are too important to be left to the generals, surely prisoners' rights are too precious to be left to the jailors . We must add a caveat. Where prison torture is the credible charge and human person the potential casualty, the benefit of scepticism justly belongs to the individual's physical-mental immunity, not to the hyper-sensitivity about safe custody.
Some welcome features : Community based litigation and participative justice, supportive of democratic legality.
23. A few special forensic features of the proceedings before us have seminal significance and I advert to them in limine as helpful factors in the progressive development of the legal process.
24. The essence of this class of litigation is not adjudication on particular grievances of individual prisoners but broad delivery of social justice. It goes beyond mere moral weight-lifting or case-by-case correction but transcend into forensic humanisation of a harsh legal legacy which has for long hidden from judicial view. It is the necessitous task of this Court, when invited appropriately, to adventure even into fresh areas of agony and injustice and to inject humane constitutional ethic into imperial statutory survivals, especially when the (prison) Executive, thirty years after Independence, defends the alleged wrong as right and the Legislatures, whose members, over the decades, are not altogether strangers to the hurtful features of jails, are perhaps pre-occupied with more popular business than concern for the detained derelicts who are a scattered, voiceless noiseless minority.
25. Although neither of these writ petitions is a class action in the strict sense, each is representative of many other similar cases. I think these 'martyr' litigations possess a beneficent potency beyond the individual litigant, and their consideration on the wider representative basis strengthens the rule of law. Class actions, community litigations, representative suits, test cases and public interest proceedings' are in advance on our traditional court processes and faster people's vicarious involvement in our justice system with a broad based concept of locus standi so necessary in a democracy where the masses are in many senses weak.
26. Another hopeful processual feature falls for notice. Citizens for Democracy, an organisation operating in the field of human rights, has been allowed to intervene in the Sobraj case and, on its behalf. Shri Tarkunde has made legal submissions fuelled by passion for jail reforms. The intervention of social welfare organisation in litigative processes pregnant with wider implications is a healthy mediation between the People and the Rule of law. Wisely permitted, participative justice, promoted through mass based organizations and public bodies with special concern seeking to intervene, has a democratic potential for the little men and the law. We have essayed at length the solutions to the issues raised and heard parties ad libitum because of their gravity and novelty...although a capsulated discussion might make-do. A short cut is a wrong cut where people's justice is at stake.
this Court's role as catalyst of prison justice.
27. It is an unhappy reflection, charged with pessimism and realism, that Governments have come and Governments have gone but the jails largely manage to preserve the macabre heritage and ignore the mahatma's message. And this, with all the reform bruited about for decades and personal experience of statesman in state power. The learned Attorney General at a very early stage of one of these cases, and the learned Additional Solicitor General as well as Shri Tarkunde in the course of their submissions, did state that this Court's reformist response to the challenges raised here may go a long way in catalysing those humane changes in the prison laws and practices already high on the national agenda of Government. Disturbing Commission Reports and public proceedings put to shame prison justice and shake people's faith in the firm fighting functionalism of the judicial process. So I have stretched the canvas wide and counsel have copiously helped the Court.
Prison decency and judicial responsibility
28. What penitentiary reforms will promote rapport between current prison practices and constitutional norms ? Basic prison decency is an aspect of criminal justice. And the judiciary has a constituency of which prisoners, ordered in by court sentence, are a numerous part.
29. This vicarious responsibility has induced the Supreme Court of the United States to observe :
In a series of decisions this Court held that, even though the Governmental purpose be legitimate and substantial, that purpose cannot be pursued by means that broadly stifle fundamental personal liberties when the end can be more narrowly achieved. The breadth of legislative abridgement must be viewed in the light of less drastic means for achieving the same basic purpose.
(Shelton v. Tucker, 364 US 476 (1950) at p. 468)
30. Karuna is a component of jail Justice.
31. Ex post facto justification of prison cruelty as prevention of disorder and escape is often a dubious allegation. Another factor often forgotten, while justifying harsh treatment of prisoners, is the philosophy of rehabilitation. The basis is that the custodial staff can make a significant contribution by enforcing the rule of prison law and preparing convicts for a law-abiding life after their release-mainstreaming, as it is sometimes called.
32. Mr. Justice Stewart in Pall adverted to the twin objectives of imprisonment. 'An important function of the correction system is the deterrence of crime. The premise is that by confining criminal offenders in a facility where they are isolated from the rest of society, a condition that most people presumably find undesirable, they and others will be deterred from committing additional criminal offences. This isolation, of course, also serves a protective function by quarantining criminal offenders for a given period of time while, it is hoped, the rehabilitative processes of the corrections system work to correct the offender's demonstrated criminal proclivity. Thus, since most offenders will eventually return to society, another paramount objective of the corrections system is the rehabilitation of those committed to its custody. Finally, central to all other corrections goals is the institutional consideration of internal security within the corrections facilities themselves. It is in the light of these legitimate penal objectives that a court must assess challenges to prison regulations based on asserted constitutional rights of prisoners.'
33. The benign purpose behind deprivation of freedom of locomotion and expression is habilitation of the criminal into good behavior, ensuring social defence on his release into the community. This rationale is subverted by torture-some treatment, antagonism and bitterness which spoil the correctional process. 'Fair treatment...will enhance the chance of rehabilitation by reactions to arbitrariness' (33 L. Ed. 2d. 484).
34. Rehabilitation effort as a necessary component of incarceration is part of the Indian criminal justice system as also of the United States. For instance, this correctional attitude has been incorporated as a standard by the National Advisory Commission on Criminal Justice Standards and Goals :
...A rehabilitative purpose is or ought to be implicit in every sentence of an offender unless ordered otherwise by the sentencing court.
35. In Mohammad Giasuddin v. State of A.P. MANU/SC/0108/1977 : 1977CriLJ1557 this Court strongly endorsed the importance of the hospital setting and the therapeutic goal of imprisonment :
Progressive criminologists across the world will agree that the Gandhian diagnosis of offenders as patients and his conception of prisons as hospitals-mental and moral-is the key to the pathology of delinquency and the therapeutic role of 'punishment'. The whole man is a healthy man and every man is born good. Criminality is a curable deviance.... Our prisons should be correctional houses, not cruel iron aching the soul.... This nation cannot-and, if it remembers its incarcerated leaders and freedom fighters-will not but revolutionize the conditions inside that grim little world. We make these persistent observations only to drive home the imperative of freedom-that its deprivation, by the State, is validated only by a plan to make the sentencees more worthy of that birthright. There is a spiritual dimension to the first page of our Constitution which projects into penology.
All this adds up to the important proposition that it is a crime of punishment to further torture a person undergoing imprisonment, as the remedy aggravates the malady and thus ceases to be a reasonable justification for confiscation of personal freedom and is arbitrary because it is blind action not geared to the goal of social defence, which is one of the primary ends of imprisonment. It reverses the process by manufacturing worse animals when they are released into the mainstream of society. Roger G. Lanphear, in a recent study, has quoted a telling letter from a prisoner which makes the poignant point.
Dear Mrs. Stender : You cannot rehabilitate a man through brutality and disrespect. Regardless of the crime a man may commit, he still is a human being and has feelings. And the main reason most inmates in prison today disrespect their keepers is because they themselves (the inmates) are disrespected and are not treated like human beings. I myself have witnessed brutal attacks upon inmates and have suffered a few myself, uncalled for. I can understand a guard or guards restraining an inmate if he becomes violent. But many a time this restraining has turned into a brutal beating. Does this type of treatment bring about respect and rehabilitation ? No. It only instills hostility and causes alienation toward the prison officials from the inmate or inmates involved. If you treat a man like an animal, then you must expect him to act like one. For every action, there is a reaction. This is only human nature. And in order for an inmate to act like a human being you must trust him as such. Treating him like an animal will only get negative results from him. You can't spit in his face and expect him to smile and say thank you. I have seen this happen also. There is a large gap between the inmate and prison officials. And it will continue to grow until the prison officials learn that an inmate is no different than them, only in the sense that he has broken a law. He still has feelings, and he's still human being. And until the big wheels in Sacramento and the personnel inside the prisons start practicing rehabilitation, and stop practising zoology, then they can expect continuous chaos and trouble between inmates and officials. Lewis Moore
36. We must heed the wholesome counsel of the British Royal Commission :
If the suggestion were that, because of enormity of the crime, murderers ought to be subjected to special rigorous treatment, this would run counter to the "accepted principle of modern prison administration that imprisonment is itself the penalty and that it is not the function of the Prison authorities to add further penalties day by day by punitive conditions of discipline, labour diet and general treatment.
37. The relevance of the thought that accentuation of injury, beyond imprisonment, may be counter-productive of the therapeutic objective of the penal system will be clear when we test such infliction on the touchstone of Article 19 and the 'reasonableness' of the action. In depth application of these seminal aspects may be considered after unfolding the fact-situations in the two cases. Suffice it to say that, so long as judges are invigilators and enforcers of constitutionality and performance auditors of legality, and convicts serve terms in that grim microcosm called prison by the mandate of the court, a continuing institutional responsibility vests in the system to monitor in the incarceratory process and prevent security 'excesses'. Jailors are bound by the rule of law and cannot inflict supplementary sentences under disguises or defeat the primary purposes of imprisonment. Additional torture by forced cellular solitude or iron immobilisation-that is the complaint here-stands the peril of being shot down as unreasonable, arbitrary and is perilously near unconstitutionality.
Court's interpretative function when faced with invalidatory alternative.
38. Batra puts in issue the constitutionality of Section 30(2) of the Prisons Act, 1894 (the Act, for short) while Sobhraj impugns the vires of Section 56. But the Court does not 'rush in' to demolish provisions where judicial endeavour, amelioratively interpretational, may achieve both constitutionality and compassionate resurrection. The salutary strategy of sustaining the validity of the law and softening its application was, with lovely dexterity, adopted by Sri Soli Sorabjee appearing for the State. The semantic technique of updating the living sense of a dated legislation is, in our view, perfectly legitimate, especially when, in a developing country like ours, the corpus juris is, in some measure a Raj hang-over.
39. Parenthetically, we may express surprise that, going by the Punjab Jail Manual (1975), the politically notorious Regulation III of 1818 and ban on 'Gandhi cap' still survive in Free India's Corpus Juris what with all the sound and fury against detention without trial and national homage to Gandhiji.
40. To meet the needs of India today, the imperatives of Independence desiderate a creatives role for the Courts in interpretation and application, especially when enactments from the imperial mint govern. Words grow with the world. That is the dynamics of semantics.
41. Read Dickerson has suggested :
...the Courts are at least free from control by original legislatures. Curtis, for one, has contended that, consistently with the ascertained meaning of the statute, a court should be able to shake off the dust of the past and plant its feet firmly in the present.
...The legislature which passed the statute has adjourned and its members gone home to their constituents or to a long rest from all law making. So why bother about what they intended or what they would have done ? Better be prophetic than archaeological, better deal with the future than with the past, better pay a decent respect for a future legislature than stand in awe of one that has folded up its papers and joined its friends at the country club or in the cemetery....
...Let the courts deliberate on what the present or future legislature would do after it had read the court's opinion, after the situation has been explained, after the court has exhibited the whole fabric of the law into which this particular bit of legislation had to be adjusted.
42. Constitutional deference to the Legislature and the democratic assumption that people's representatives express the wisdom of the community lead courts into interpretation of statutes which preserves and sustains the validity of the provision. That is to say, courts must, with intelligent imagination, inform themselves of the values of the Constitution and with functional flexibility, explore the meaning of meanings to adopt that construction which humanely constitutionalizes the statute in question. Plainly stated, we must endeavour to interpret the words in Sections 30 and 56 of the Prisons Act and the paragraphs of the Prison Manual in such manner that while the words belong to the old order, the sense radiates the new order. The luminous guideline on Weems v. United States sets our sights high 54 L. ed. 801 (Weems v. United States) :
Legislation, both statutory and constitutional is enacted, it is hue, from an experience of evils, but-its general language should not, therefore, be necessarily confined to the form that civil had therefore, taken. Time works changes, brings into existence new conditions and purposes. Therefore, a principle, to be vital, must be capable of wider application than the mischief which gave it birth. This is peculiarly true of constitutions. They are not ephemeral enactments designed to meet passing occasions. They are, to use the words of Chief Justice Marshall, "designed to approach immortality as nearly as human institutions can approach it". The future is their care, and provisions for events of good and bad tendencies of which no prophecy can be made. In the application of a constitution, therefore, our contemplation cannot be only of what has been, but of what may be. Under any other rule a Constitution would indeed be as easy of application as it would be. Under any other rule a Constitution would indeed be as easy of applications as it would be deficient in efficacy and power. Its general principles would have little value, and be converted by precedent into impotent and lifeless formulas. Rights declared in the words might be lost in reality. And this has been recognised. The meaning and vitality of the Constitution have developed against narrow and restrictive construction.
43. A note in Harvard Law Review Hervard Law Review, Vol. 24 (1910-11) p. 54-55 commenting on Weems v. United States urges such a progressive construction :
The inhibition of the infliction of 'cruel and unusual punishment' first appears in the Bill of Rights of 1680, at a time when the humanity-of Judge Jeffreys of Bloody Assizes' fame and of his fellows under the Stuarts, loomed large in the popular mind.... In the eighth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States the same prohibition is found...(Courts) have held that whatever is now considered cruel and unusal in fact is forbidden by it. Another difference of interpretation intersects these divergent views and separates the Courts which confine the words to the kind or mode of punishment from those who extend their meaning to include as well its degree or severity. In a recent case concerning such a provision in the Bill of Rights of the Philippine Islands, which has the same meaning as the Eighth Amendment, the Supreme Court of United States, committing itself to the most liberal interpretation, not only held that the clause was concerned with the degree of punishment, but approved of the extension of its scope to keep pace with the increasing enlightenment of public opinion (Weems v. United States, 217 US, 349). It is, indeed, difficult to believe that a law passed in the twentieth century is aimed solely at abuses which became almost unknown two hundred years before, even though it is an exact transcript of an old Bill. And excessive punishment may be quite as bad as punishment cruel in its very nature. The fear of judicial intermeddling voiced by one of the dissenting judges seems scarcely warranted, for the power to prevent disproportionate punishment is to be exercised only when the punishment shocks public feeling. With thin limitation, the progressive construction of this clause laid down by this case seems desirable.
(emphasis added)
44. The jurisprudence of statutory construction, especially when a vigorous break with the past and smooth reconciliation with a radical constitutional value-set are the object, uses the art of reading down and reading wide, as part of interpretational engineering. Judges are the mediators between the societal tenses. this Court in R.L. Arora v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0033/1964 : [1964]6SCR784 and in a host of other cases, has lent precedential support for this proposition where that process renders a statute constitutional. The learned Additional Solicitor General has urged upon us that the Prisons Act (Sections 30 and 56) can be vehicle of enlightened values if we pour into seemingly fossilized words a freshness of sense. "It is well settled that if certain provisions of law construed in one way will be consistent with the Constitution, and if another interpretation would render them unconstitutional, the Court would lean in favour of the former construction."
45. To put the rule beyond doubt, interstitial legislation through interpretation is a life-process of the law and judges are party to it. In the present case we are persuaded to adopt this semantic readjustment so as to obviate a legicidal sequel. A validation-oriented approach becomes the philosophy of statutory construction, as we will presently explain by application.
The two problems and our basic approach
46. The specific questions before us are whether the quasi-solitudinous cellular custody of sorts imposed on Batra is implicit in his death sentence and otherwise valid and the heavy irons forced on the person of Sobhraj still standing his trial comport with our constitutional guarantees qualified and curtailed by the prison environs. Necessarily our perspective has to be humanistic-juristic becoming the Karuna of our Constitution and the international consciousness on human rights.
47. Three quotes set this tone sharply. In the words of Will Durant Will Durant's Article "What Life has taught Me", published in Bhawan' Journal, Vol. XXIV, No. 18, April 9, 1978. p. 71 at p. 72 : 'It is time for all good man to come to the aid of their party, whose name is civilization'. And, more particularised is the observation of Chief Justice Warren E. Burger about what is to be done with an offender once he is convicted, that this is 'one of mankind's unsolved and largely neglected problems'. And Winston Churchill's choice thought and chiselled diction bear repetition :
The mood and temper of the public with regard to the treatment of crime and criminals is one of the most unfailing tests of the civilization of any country.
And a clinching comment concludes this thought. The White Paper entitled "People in Prison" published by the British Government in November, 1969, articulates a profound thought in its concluding paragraph, much less true for India as for the United Kingdom :
A society that believes in the worth of individual beings can have the quality of its belief judged, at least in part, by the quality of its prison and probate services and of the resources made available to them.
Batra facts
48. I begin with the critical facts in the first writ petition. Sunil Batra, sentenced to death but struggling survive, supplicates pathetically that although his appeal against the death sentence still pends he is being subject to solitary confinement which is contrary to the provision of the Penal Code, the Criminal Procedure Code, the Prison Act and Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. The Sessions Court of Delhi held him guilty of a gruesome murder compounded with robbery and awarded the capital penalty, way back in January. 1977. Until then, Batra was B class prisoner eligible for amenities which made his confinement bearable and companionable. But once the death penalty was pronounced, the prison superintendent promptly tore him away from fellow human, stripped him of the B class facilities and locked him up in a single cell with a small walled yard attached, beyond the view and voice of others save the jail guards and formal visitors in discharge of their official chores and a few callers once in a blue moon. The prisoner filed an appeal against his conviction and sentence to the High Court, which also heard the reference for confirmation of the death sentence under Section 395 of the Criminal Procedure Code (for short, the Code). In the meanwhile-and it proved a terribly long while-he was warehoused, as it were, in a solitary cell and kept substantially incommunicado.
49. The quasi-solitary confinement was challenged in the High Court, perhaps vaguely (not particularising the constitutional infirmities of Section 30 of the Prisons Act and the Punjab Jail Rules) but was given short shrift by the High Court. The learned single Judge reasoned : "The only point for consideration is whether the petitioner can have the facility as demanded by him till the sentence of death is confirmed. By going through all these rules I am of the clear view that he cannot be given the facilities as it might lead to disastrous consequences. It also becomes the function of the State to look to the personal safety of such a condemned prisoner. There is no force in the petition which is hereby dismissed". The appeal to a division bench was withdrawn and the present writ petition under Article 32 was filed, where the lay prisoner urged his litany of woes and some constitutional generalities, later supplemented by Sri Y.S. Chitale as amicus curiae. His lurid lot was pathetically painted by counsel. Grim walls glare at him from all sides night and day; his food is inserted into the room and his excretory needs must be fulfilled within the same space. No pillow to rest his restless head, no light inside, save the bulb that burns blindly through the night from outside. No human face or voice or view except the warder's constant compulsory intrusion into the prisoner's privacy and the routine revolutions of officials' visitations, punctuated by a few regulated visits of permitted relatives or friends, with iron bars and peering warder's presence in between. No exercise except a generous half hour, morning and evening, in a small, walled enclosure from where he may do asanas were he yogi, do meditation were he sanyasi and practise communion with Nature were he Wordsworth or Whiteman or break down in speechless sorrow were he but common clay. A few books, yes; newspapers ? No. Talk to others ? No; save echoes of one's own soliloquies; no sight of others except the stone mercy in pathetic fallacy. This segregation, notwithstanding the prescribed category of visitors permitted and censored letters allowed, argues Sri Chitale, is violation of the primordial gregariousness which, from the beginning of the species, has been man's social milieu and so constitutes a psychic trauma, when prolonged beyond years, too torture some for tears, even in our ancient land of silent mystics and lonely cavemen. For the great few, solitude sometimes is best society but for the commonality the wages of awesome seculsion, if spread over long spells, is insanity. For the fevered life of the modern man, more so under the stress of sentence, solitude is terror and cellular vacuum horror. Just think not of the contemplative saint but of the run of the mill mortal. Cage his lonely person and monitor his mind and mood with a sensitive understanding. Then you know that moments bear slow malice; hours hang heavy with ennui; days drop dead, and lonely weeks wear a vicious stillness; for sure, weary months or singleness, with monotonous nights, made more hurtful by the swarms of mosquitoes singing and stinging, and in many cells, by the blood-thirsty armies of bugs, invisibly emerging from nocturnal nowhere, to hide and bite, make for lunacy. Time cries halt and the victim wonders, is death a better deal ? Such is the torture and tension of the solitary cell, picturised by counsel.
50. The Tihar Jail is the scene and a glimpse of it is good. Law is not a brooding omnipresence in the sky but a behavioral omnipotence on the earth, a do-don't calculus of principled pragmatism. So, any discussion of prison law problems must be preceded by a feel of the cell and surroundings. For this reason we now set out the inspection notes left by Chief Justice Beg, who visited the 'condemned cell' along with his two brothers on the bench :
We inspected the cell in which the prisoner was confined. We were relieved to find that conditions there did not correspond to the picture which eloquent arguments of his counsel before us conjured up in our minds. We had been led to believe that the prisoner was kept in some kind of a dungeon with only a small hole through which light could penetrate only when there was enough sunshine. It was true that the prisoner was living in a room with a cemented floor and with no bed, furniture, or windows in it. The light came from a ventilator with iron bars on the wall at the back of the room and the wide gate of iron bars in front. The light was, however, enough. It is also true that there was no separate room for the petitioner to take a bath in or to answer calls of nature. But in this very room, the site of which given on a diagram furnished by the jail authorities, water and sanitary fittings were installed in one corner of the room. In front of the room them was a small verandah with pakka walls and iron gates separating each side of it from a similar verandah in front of an adjoining cell. The entrance into this verandah was also through a similar iron gate. The inner room in which the prisoner was confined had also a gate of iron bars. All gates were with iron bars on frames so that one could see across them through the spaces between the bars. All these gates were locked. We learnt that the petitioner was able to come into the verandah at certain times of the day. At that time only he could communicate with other similarly kept prisoners whom he could see and talk to through the iron bars. In other words, for all practical purposes, it was a kind of solitary confinement.
We did not see a separate guard for each prisoner in the row of cells for prisoners sentenced to death. All these prisoners were certainly segregated and kept apart. But it is difficult to determine, without going into the meaning of 'solitary confinement', as a term of law whether the conditions in which the petitioner was kept amounted to 'solitary confinement'. Probably, if small windows with iron bars were provided between one cell and another, the prisoners could talk to each other also so that the confinement would no longer be solitary despite the fact that they are kept in separate adjoining cells.
The petitioner did not complain of any discomfort other than being kept in 'solitary confinement' and being made to sleep on the floor. He asked us to see another part of the prison where under trials were kept. When we visited that part, we found dormitories provided there for under-trial prisoners who had beds there and their own bedding and clothing. They also had, in that part of the prison, radio sets, some of which belonged to the prisoners and others to the jail. The under-trials were allowed to mix with each other, play games, or do what they wanted within a compound.
(emphasis, ordered).
51. The basic facts bearing upon the condition of the prisoner in his cell are not denied although certain materials have been averred in the counter affidavit to make out that the mental mayhem imputed to the system vis a vis the petitioner is wild and invalid.
52. For updating the post-sentence saga of Batra it is necessary to state that the High Court has since upheld the death penalty imposed on him; and open to him still is the opportunity to seek leave to appeal under Article 136 and, if finally frustrated in this forensic pursuit, to move for the ultimate alchemy of Presidential communication under Article 72. The cumulative period from when the Sessions Court sentences to death to when the Supreme Court and the President say 'nay' for his right to life may be considerable as in this very case. From them, if discomfited at all stages and condemned to execution, to when he swings on the rope to reach 'the undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller returns' is a different, dismal chapter. Keeping these spells of suffering separate, we may approach the poignant issues of quasi-solitary confinement and its legality.
53. Article 21 insists upon procedure established by law before any person can be denuded of his freedom of locomotion. What then is the law relied upon by the State to cut down the liberty of the person to the bare bones of utter isolation? Section 30 of the Prisons Act is pressed into service in answer. The respondent's counter-affidavit alleges, in substantiation of cellular seclusion and deprivation of fellowship, the following facts :-
In fact, I submit that the provisions of Section 30 of the Prisons Act take in all necessary safeguard for the protection of the prisoners sentenced to death which are absolutely necessary in view of the state of mind of such prisoners as well as all the possible circumstances in which these prisoners may indulge in harming themselves or any other criminal activity in their voluntary discretion and in the alternative the possibility of their being harmed by any other prisoner. A prisoner under sentence of death can connive with such prisoners and may thereby succeed in getting some instrument by which he may commit suicide or may be enabled to escape from the jail. Moreover a prisoner under sentence of death has a very harmful influence on the other prisoners.
In the administration of prisoners in jail the maximum security measures have to be adopted in respect of the prisoners under sentence of death. As they are highly frustrated lot, they will always be on the look out for an opportunity to over-power the watch and ward guard, and make attempt to escape. It is quite relevant to add that under the existing provisions of Jail Manual, Armed Guard cannot be posted to guard the prisoners. The Warder guard has to guard them bare handed. In case the prisoners under sentence of death are allowed to remain outside the cells, then it would be next to impossible for the guard to control them bare handed.
Under the provisions of the new Cr.P.C. the Capital Punishment is awarded only to the exceptionally few prisoners because now it is the exception rather than rule, and the learned Courts have to record special reasons for awarding the extreme punishment. This implies that the prisoners under sentences of death are exceptionally dangerous prisoners, who do require maximum security measures while confined in Jail. Under the existing arrangements in the Jail there can be no substitute to the confinement treatment of such prisoners otherwise than in the cells. After having been awarded the capital punishment the prisoners sentenced to death harbour feelings of hatred against the authorities. If such prisoners are allowed to remain outside the cells then there is every possibility of incidents of assaults etc. on the fact (sic) of such prisoners.
...If the prisoners sentenced to death are mixed up with other categories of prisoners then the very basic structure of superintendence and management of jails will be greatly jeopardised.
...I submit that the provisions of Section 30 of the Prisons Act are absolutely necessary looking to the state of mind of prisoners under sentence of death, the possibility of such prisoners harming themselves or getting harmed by others or escaping in view of the relevant sociological aspects of security relating to the Society in the modern States.
54. These factual-legal submission deserve examination. When arguments spread out the learned Additional Solicitors abandoned some of the extreme stances taken in the States affidavit and reduced the rigour of the averments by gentler postures.
55. Essentiality, we have to decide whether, as a fact, Batra is being subjected to solitary confinement. We have further to explore whether Section 30 of the Act contemplates some sort of solitary confinement for condemned prisoners and, if it does, that legalizes current prison praxis. We have further to investigate whether such total seclusion, even if covered by Section 30(2) is the correct construction, having regard to the conspectus of the relevant provision of the Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code. Finally, we have to pronounce upon the vires of Section 30(2), if it does condemn the death sentences to dismal solitude.
56. The learned Additional Solicitor General made a broad submission that solitary confinement was perfectly constitutional and relied on citations from the American Courts at the lesser levels Its bearing on the structure of his argument is that if even in a country like the United States where the VIIIth Amendment bans cruel and unusual punishment, the 'solitary' has survived judicial scrutiny, it is a fortiori case in India, where there is no constitutional prohibition against cruel and unusal punishment.
57. True our Constitution has no 'due process' clause or the VIII Amendment; but, in this branch of law, after Cooper and Maneka Gandhi, the consequence is the same.