MANU/SC/0494/2017
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 5227 of 2017
Decided On: 24.04.2017
Appellants: T.P. Senkumar
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Madan B. Lokur and Deepak Gupta, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Dushyant A. Dave, Sr. Adv., Prashant Bhushan, Haris Beeran, Mushtaq Salim, Usman Khan, Dev Prakash and Radha Shyam Jena, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: Harish Salve, R. Venkataramani, Sr. Advs., G. Prakash, Beena Prakash, Priyanka Prakash, Jishnu M.L., Manu Srinath, K.L. Janjani, Jayant Mohan, B. Krishna Prasad, Aljo K. Joseph and Shelna K. Yashraj, Advs.
Subject: Service
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
KERALA POLICE ACT, 2011 - Section 97
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Kerala Police Act, 2011 - Section 18, Kerala Police Act, 2011 - Section 24, Kerala Police Act, 2011 - Section 25, Kerala Police Act, 2011 - Section 97, Kerala Police Act, 2011 - Section 97(2); Police Act, 1861;Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 302, Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) - Section 449; Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 16, Constitution of India - Article 32, Constitution of India - Article 141, Constitution of India - Article 142, Constitution of India - Article 144
Cases Referred:
Prakash Singh and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8516/2006 : (2006) 8 SCC 1; Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0786/1997 : (1997) 6 SCC 241; Vineet Narain v. Union of India MANU/SC/0827/1998 : (1998) 1 SCC 226; E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0380/1973 : (1974) 4 SCC 3; Citizens for Justice & Peace v. State of Gujarat MANU/SC/0018/2009 : (2009) 11 SCC 213; M.A. Rasheed v. State of Kerala MANU/SC/0051/1974 : (1974) 2 SCC 687; Liversidge v. Anderson 1942 AC 206; Commissioner of Police v. Gordhandas Bhanji MANU/SC/0002/1951 : AIR 1952 SC 16; Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner MANU/SC/0209/1977 : 1978(1) SCC 405
Case Category:
SERVICE MATTERS
Citing Reference:


Affirmed
  2

Discussed
  5

Mentioned
  2

Case Note:
Service - Displacement from post - Dissatisfaction in general public - Section 97 of Kerala Police Act, 2011 - Appellant was appointed as State Police Chief - Appellant's tenure was cut short - Appellant was transferred out as Chairman and Managing Director of Police Housing and Construction Corporation Limited on State deputation - Appellant challenged his displacement by filing petition in Tribunal, which was dismissed - Division Bench of High Court dismissed petition - Hence, present appeal - Whether Appellant's displacement from post of State Police Chief before expiry of his tenure of two years was justified in law - Whether State Police Chief can be removed from his tenure posting on prima facie opinion that he or she caused "serious dissatisfaction in general public about efficiency of police in his jurisdiction"

Facts:

The Appellant was appointed as the Director General of Police & Head of Police Force (the State Police Chief) in terms of Section 18 of The Kerala Police Act, 2011. Section 97 of the Act mandates that the State Government shall ensure a minimum tenure of two years for the State Police Chief. However, the State Police Chief could be transferred out before completion of the tenure if the State Government is prima facie satisfied that it is necessary to do so, on certain grounds specified in Sub-section (2) of Section 97 of the Act. Clause (e) thereof relates to causing "serious dissatisfaction in the general public about efficiency of police in his jurisdiction."

The Appellant's tenure as State Police Chief should have continued till 21st May, 2017 and even thereafter till his superannuation sometime in June, 2017. However, the tenure was cut short and he was transferred out as Chairman and Managing Director of the Kerala Police Housing and Construction Corporation Limited on State deputation basis by an order dated 1st June, 2016.

The Appellant challenged his displacement by filing a petition in the Central Administrative Tribunal, which was dismissed. He then preferred a petition in the High Court challenging the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal. The Division Bench dismissed the petition by the impugned judgment and order. Hence, the present appeal.

Held, while allowing the appeal:

(i) The removal or displacement or transfer out of an officer from a sensitive tenure post requires serious consideration and good reasons that can be tested so that the officer is not dealt with as a pawn in a game. The somewhat exacting standards were absent in the present case and the Appellant was displaced from the post of State Police Chief summarily and without reasonable cause. [5]

(ii) The removal or displacement of any senior level officer from a tenure appointment must be for compelling reasons and must be justified by the concerned authority, if called upon to do so, on material that can be objectively tested. This is what the Rule of law expects and this is what Section 97 of the Act expects-the law must be faithfully implemented in a purposive manner. If the Appellant failed to take any action against the errant police officers, the entire official machinery starting from the Chief Minister down to the Chief Secretary and the Additional Chief Secretary were equally to blame. The recommendation to take action against the errant police officers was made to the Chief Minister and not to the Appellant. [80] and[81]

(iii) The Temple tragedy and the murder case were not the flash points necessitating the transfer of the Appellant. The reason for his transfer was his conduct post the Temple tragedy in not taking action against the errant police officers but supporting them and in apportioning a part of the blame on the district administration. The reference to the murder case was an attempt at padding up the reason while the reference to the alleged interference in the investigations by the CB-CID was a red herring or a ruse-the alleged interference was not even in the contemplation of the Chief Minster. The addition of the allegation of interference with the investigations in the Temple tragedy was a further attempt in that direction-to somehow or the other nail the Appellant. [87]

(iv) It could not be anybody's case and indeed no such submission was made that the district administration had absolutely no role to play in the Temple tragedy. While a major part of the blame must rest on the police force at the ground level, the district administration perhaps cannot be completely absolved of its responsibility in the enormous tragedy that took place, but this was ultimately an issue that may have to be decided by the High Court or by the judicial commission or by the CB-CID. In any event, this could hardly be any justification for coming to the conclusion that the Appellant alone deserved to be acted against only because he supported his subordinates, while seeking to apportion a part of the blame on the district administration. Similarly, as far as the murder case was concerned some of the conclusions arrived at on the file placed were a little unfortunate and appeared to be prejudging the investigation. The State Police Chief could not alone be blamed for any lapse in investigation or any delay in apprehending the Accused. This was more so considering the fact that a Special Investigating Team had been appointed consisting of 28 officers to investigate the murder case. The Appellant was not the investigating officer in the matter. Even though the Appellant was completely absolved of any lapse in respect of the Temple tragedy, he wanted to interfere with the investigation for no apparent reason except perhaps to benefit the Commissioner of Police for no apparent reason. There was no evidence or material to arrive at any such conclusive opinion. [89],[90] and[91]

(v) There was no material adverse to the interests of the Appellant except an expression of opinion and views formed. This make-believe prima facie satisfaction by itself could not take out judicial review of administrative action in the garb of subjective satisfaction of the State Government. The Appellant had been unfairly and arbitrarily dealt with. The impugned judgments and orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal were set aside. A direction was issued to the State to reinstate the Appellant as the State Police Chief. [93] and[96]
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.01.2017 of the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in OP (CAT) No. 205 of 2016 (MANU/KE/0764/2017)
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
JUDGMENT
Madan B. Lokur, J.
1. The Appellant-Dr. T.P. Senkumar-is said to be an outstanding officer in the Indian Police Service and in view of his meritorious record and service, he was appointed as the Director General of Police & Head of Police Force (the State Police Chief) in terms of Section 18 of The Kerala Police Act, 2011 (for short "the Act") on 22nd May, 2015.
2. Section 97 of the Act mandates that the State Government shall ensure a minimum tenure of two years for the State Police Chief. However, the State Police Chief could be transferred out before completion of the tenure if the State Government is prima facie satisfied that it is necessary to do so, on certain grounds specified in Sub-section (2) of Section 97 of the Act. We are concerned with Clause (e) thereof relating to causing "serious dissatisfaction in the general public about efficiency of police in his jurisdiction."
3. Ordinarily therefore, the Appellant's tenure as State Police Chief should have continued till 21st May, 2017 and even thereafter till his superannuation sometime in June, 2017. However, the tenure was cut short and he was transferred out as Chairman and Managing Director of the Kerala Police Housing and Construction Corporation Ltd. on State deputation basis by an order dated 1st June, 2016.
4. The Appellant challenged his displacement by filing a petition in the Central Administrative Tribunal, which was dismissed. He then preferred a writ petition in the Kerala High Court challenging the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal. The Division Bench hearing the writ petition dismissed it by the impugned judgment and order dated 25th January, 2017. It is under these circumstances that the Appellant is now before us.
5. The question for our consideration is whether the Appellant's displacement from the post of State Police Chief in Kerala before the expiry of his tenure of two years was justified in law. In our opinion, the answer is in the negative. The removal or displacement or transfer out of an officer from a sensitive tenure post requires serious consideration and good reasons that can be tested so that the officer is not dealt with as a pawn in a game. Unfortunately, the somewhat exacting standards are absent in the present case and the Appellant was displaced from the post of State Police Chief summarily and without reasonable cause.
Prakash Singh's case
6. Before detailing the controversy before us it is necessary to refer to the decision of this Court in Prakash Singh and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/8516/2006 : (2006) 8 SCC 1 In that case, this Court dealt with the issue of police reforms in the context of the far-reaching changes that had taken place in the country after the enactment of the Indian Police Act, 1861. It was noted that no comprehensive review had been undertaken in this regard at the national level and therefore, the Government of India appointed a National Police Commission on 15th November, 1977 which recommended significant police reforms. It was also noted that subsequently, there were other half a dozen reports on the same or similar subject but no substantive reforms were brought about.
7. In the course of its judgment, this Court referred to a research paper titled "Political and Administrative Manipulation of the Police" published in 1979 by the Bureau of Police Research and Development. The research paper contained a caution to the effect that excessive control by the political executive and its principal advisers over the police had the inherent danger of making the police a tool for subverting the process of law, promoting the growth of authoritarianism and shaking the very foundations of democracy. We may add that one of the findings in the research paper is "The present predicament of Police is that they have been exposed to a two pronged pressure vertically from the Administration and laterally from the politicians."1 With these two pressures, the independent functioning of the police can and sometimes does get compromised at the hands of very important persons and those claiming proximity to very important persons.
8. Keeping this and other material in mind, including the fact that commitment, devotion and accountability of the police has to be only to the Rule of law, this Court issued certain directions in exercise of powers Under Article 32 read with Article 142 of the Constitution for doing complete justice in any cause or matter. This Court took the view that the directions and guidelines ought to be observed in the absence of legislation and implemented till the Legislatures pass appropriate legislations.
9. Resort to Article 32 read with Article 142 of the Constitution in such situations was in continuation of similar views expressed in Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0786/1997 : (1997) 6 SCC 241 wherein this Court held in paragraph 16 of the Report that in the absence of enacted law,
...... to provide for the effective enforcement of the basic human right of gender equality and guarantee against sexual harassment and abuse, more particularly against sexual harassment at workplaces, we lay down the guidelines and norms specified hereinafter for due observance at all workplaces or other institutions, until a legislation is enacted for the purpose. This is done in exercise of the power available Under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of the fundamental rights and it is further emphasised that this would be treated as the law declared by this Court Under Article 141 of the Constitution.