MANU/SC/1217/2017
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 1359, 1360, 2481, 526, 1561, 4917, 4936, 5735, 8377-8378, 10471, 9498 and 10472-10473/2017
Decided On: 22.09.2017
Appellants: Techi Tagi Tara
Vs.
Respondent: Rajendra Singh Bhandari and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Madan B. Lokur and Deepak Gupta, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: P.S. Narasimha, ASG, A. Mariarputham, Adv. Gen., Ranjit Thomas, Subramonium Prasad, Jaideep Gupta, Sr. Adv., V.N. Raghupathy, Nishant Ramakantrao Katneshwarkar, Deepa M. Kulkarni, Amit Agarwal, Sanjay Kumar Visen, M.R. Shamshad, Tushar Mehta, Dhruv Pali, Himanshu Pal, Aruna Mathur, Avneesh Arputham, Anuradha Arputham, Amit Arora, Simran Jeet, Advs. for Arputhum Aruna and Co., Guntur Prabhakar, Prerna Singh, Rachana Srivastava, Monika, Sukrit R. Kapoor, S.S. Shamshery, Amit Sharma, Ankit Raj, Vaibhav Prakash, Ruchi Kohli, R. Rakesh Sharma, K.V. Vijaya Kumar, Abhishek, P. Venkat Reddy, Prashant Kr. Tyagi, Advs. for Venkat Palwai Law Associates, Sapam Biswajit Meitei, Naresh Kumar Gaur and Ashok Kumar Singh, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: A.S. Nadkarni, ASG, D.K. Singh, AAG, Vivek Gupta, Mukesh Verma, Pawan Kumar Shukla, Yash Pal Dhingra, M. Shoeb Alam, Fauzia Shakil, Ujjwal Singh, Mojahid Karim Khan, Atul Jha, Sandeep Jha, Dharmendra Kumar Sinha, Ruchira Gupta, Shishir Deshpande, Mona Sinha, Arjun Garg, Ranjan Mukherjee, P.V. Yogeswaran, M.K. Enatoli Sema, Edward Belho, Amit Kumar Singh, K. Luikang Michael, Z.H. Isaac Haiding, Som Raj Choudhury, Raja Chatterjee, Chanchal Kumar Ganguli, Piyush Sachdev, Runa Bhuyan, Shubham Bhalla, Ritesh Khatri, Gaurang Kanth, Chandan Kumar, Eshita Baruah, K.V. Jagdishvaran, G. Indira, V.G. Pragasam, S. Prabhu Ramasubramanian, Manu Sundaram, Hemantika Wahi, Jesal Wahi, Mamta Singh, Shodhika Sharma, Puja Singh, Anuvrat Sharma, Komal Mundhra and Saurav Agrawal, Advs.
Subject: Civil
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 4(2), Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 8; Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 5(2), Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 - Section 10, National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 2, National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 14, National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 - Section 15, Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991;Constitution of India - Article 21, Constitution of India - Article 48A, Constitution of India - Article 51A
Cases Referred:
Binay Kumar Sinha v. State of Jharkhand MANU/JH/0352/2002 : (2002) 50 BLJR 2223; Prabhakar v. Joint Director, Sericulture Department MANU/SC/1041/2015 : (2015) 15 SCC 1; State of Punjab v. Salil Sabhlok MANU/SC/0166/2013 : (2013) 5 SCC 1; Ashok Kumar Yadav v. State of Haryana MANU/SC/0026/1985 : (1985) 4 SCC 417; State of U.P. v. Jeet S. Bisht MANU/SC/7702/2007 : (2007) 6 SCC 586; Rajendra Singh Bhandari v. State of Uttarakhand and Ors.; Research Foundation for Science v. Union of India
Prior History / High Court Status:
From the impugned Final Order dated 24.08.2016 passed by the National Green Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi in Original Application No. 318/2013 (MANU/GT/0111/2016)
Authorities Referred:
Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, Page 424
Case Category:
APPEAL AGAINST ORDERS OF STATUTORY BODIES - TRIBUNALS
Citing Reference:


Affirmed
  2

Discussed
  4

Mentioned
  2

Case Note:
Civil - Members of Board - Appointment thereof - National Green Tribunal was perturbed and anguished that some persons appointed to State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) did not have, according to NGT, necessary expertise or qualifications to be members or chairpersons of such high powered and specialized statutory bodies - Tribunal directed State Governments to reconsider appointments and in laying down guidelines for appointment to SPCBs, however well-meaning they might be - Hence, present appeal - Whether appointment of members of SPCBs deserves continuation or cancellation.

Facts:

National Green Tribunal was perturbed and anguished that some persons appointed to the State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) did not have, according to the NGT, the necessary expertise or qualifications to be members or chairpersons of such high powered and specialized statutory bodies and therefore did not deserve their appointment or nomination. Tribunal directed the State Governments to reconsider the appointments and in laying down guidelines for appointment to the SPCBs, however well-meaning they might be. Hence, present appeal.

Held, while dismissing the appeal:

(i) There must be a substantial question relating to the environment and that question must arise in a dispute-it should not be an academic question. There must also be a claimant raising that dispute which dispute was capable of settlement by the National Green Tribunal (NGT) by the grant of some relief which could be in the nature of compensation or restitution of property damaged or restitution of the environment and any other incidental or ancillary relief connected therewith. [17]

(ii) The failure of the State Government to appoint professional and experienced persons to key positions in the State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) or the failure to appoint any person at all might incidentally result in an ineffective implementation of the Water Act and the Air Act, but this could not be classified as a primary dispute over which the NGT would have jurisdiction. Such a failure might be of a statutory obligation over which, in the present context and not universally, only a constitutional court would have jurisdiction and not a statutory body like the NGT. NGT could not consider who should be appointed as a Chairperson or a member of any SPCB or who should not be so appointed. [19]

(iii) Order of the NGT was set aside, direction granted to Executive in all the States to frame appropriate guidelines or recruitment Rules within six months, considering the institutional requirements of the SPCBs and the law laid down by statute, and as per the reports of various committees and authorities and ensure that suitable professionals and experts are appointed to the SPCBs. Any damage to the environment could be permanent and irreversible or at least long-lasting. [33]
Disposition:
Disposed of
JUDGMENT
Madan B. Lokur, J.
1. This batch of appeals is directed against the judgment and order dated 24th August, 2016 passed by the National Green Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (for short 'the NGT') in Original Application No. 318 of 2013.1 On a reading of the judgment and order passed by the NGT, it is quite clear that the Tribunal was perturbed and anguished that some persons appointed to the State Pollution Control Boards (for short 'SPCBs') did not have, according to the NGT, the necessary expertise or qualifications to be members or chairpersons of such high powered and specialized statutory bodies and therefore did not deserve their appointment or nomination. While we fully commiserate with the NGT and share the pain and anguish, we are of the view that the Tribunal has, at law, exceeded its jurisdiction in directing the State Governments to reconsider the appointments and in laying down guidelines for appointment to the SPCBs, however well-meaning they might be. Therefore, we set aside the decision of the NGT, but note that a large number of disconcerting facts have been brought out in the judgment which need serious consideration by those in authority, particularly the State Governments that make appointments or nominations to the SPCBs. Such appointments should not be made casually or without due application of mind considering the duties, functions and responsibilities of the SPCBs.