MANU/SC/0401/1973
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 2134 of 1972
Decided On: 26.09.1973
Appellants:The State of Jammu & Kashmir
Vs.
Respondent:Triloki Nath Khosa and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.N. Ray, C.J., D.G. Palekar, P.N. Bhagwati, V.R. Krishna Iyer and Y.V. Chandrachud, JJ.
Subject: Service
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 226
Cases Referred:
Roshan Lal Tandon v. Union of India, MANU/SC/0328/1967
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  7

Mentioned
  12

Case Note:
Service - promotion - Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution of India, Jammu and Kashmir Engineering (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules 1970 and Service Law - persons drawn from different sources and integrated into one class classified for purpose of promotion on basis of educational qualifications - respondents who were diploma holders in engineering filed petition challenging validity of manner of promotion adopted by Government - Supreme Court observed that though persons were appointed directly and by promotion were integrated into common class of assistant engineers they could for purposes of promotion be classified on basis of educational classification - held, rule providing that graduates shall be eligible for such promotion to exclusion of diploma holders did not violate Articles 14 and 16.

JUDGMENT
Y.V. Chandrachud, J.
1. If persons drawn from different sources are integrated into one class, can they be classified for purposes of promotion on the basis of their educational qualifications? That is the issue for consideration before us.
2. Respondents, who are Diploma Holders in Engineering, filed in the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution to challenge the validity of certain Service Rules framed by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir. A Learned single Judge dismissed the petition but in appeal a Division Bench of the High Court took the view that the impugned rules were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. The correctness of that view is challenged by the State of Jammu and Kashmir in this appeal by special leave.
3. Respondents, who are serving in different branches of the Engineering Service of the appellants, were appointed as Assistant Engineers between 1960 and 1966 by promotion from the Subordinate Engineering Service. Their conditions of service were then governed by the rules published under Order No. 1328-C of 1939. Those roles, to the extent material, read thus :
The following rules prescribing the procedure relating to recruitment to the gazetted services are sanctioned :-
* * * * *
(3) Special qualifications.-Under Rule 18 of the Kashmir Civil Services Rules (General), the following special qualifications are prescribed in the case of candidates for direct recruitment or recruitment by transfer, as the case may be, to the services mentioned below :-
* * *
4. The rules further provided that appointments by transfer (that is, by promotion) to the cadre of Divisional Engineers (now known as Executive Engineers) could be made only from the cadre of Assistant Engineers. Promotions to the cadre of Assistant Engineers could, in turn, be made only from the cadre of Supervisors in the Subordinate Service. Recruitment by transfer was to be made "on the basis of merit, ability and the previous record of the candidates, seniority being considered only in case of equality of merit, ability and excellence of record". The scale of pay admissible to the Assistant Engineers was Rs. 300-20-500.
5. In 1962, the appellants undertook a general revision of pay scales and framed "Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules", which were gazetted on August 6, 1962. Rule 12 divided the Assistant Engineers into two categories, datewise. Those appointed prior to August 1, 1960 were placed in Grade I while those appointed subsequently were placed in Grade II, regardless of whether appointments to the posts of Assistant Engineers were made directly or by promotion and whether the incumbents held a degree or a diploma. Those in Grade I were put in the pay scale of Rs. 300-700 while those in Grade II were put in the scale of Rs. 250-600. Officers in Grade II were entitled to go into Grade I after completing two years' service, subject to the availability of vacancies.
6. A further revision of pay scales was effected under the "Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1968" which were gazetted on February 27, 1968. Under Rule 10 (IIB)(i), Assistant Engineers were granted a new pay scale of Rs. 300-30-540-EB-35-610-QB-35-750, but it was provided that the "QB at Rs. 6lO/- will not be crossed by Assistant Engineers with Diploma Course". This rule was challenged by the respondents in so far as it denied to them an opportunity to cross the qualification bar.
7. Then came the "Jammu and Kashmir Engineering (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1970", gazetted on October 12, 1970. These rules provide for appointments to the gazetted posts in various branches of the Engineering Service of the appellants and supersede the old rules on the subject. By Rule 3(f) 'promotion' is defined to mean promotion from one class, category or grade to another class, category or grade on the basis of merit and efficiency, seniority being considered only when merit was equal. Under the Schedule annexed to these Rules, recruitment to the cadre of Executive Engineers and above was to be made only by promotion. But as regards promotion to the posts of Executive Engineers, and to those only, it was provided that only those Assistant Engineers would be eligible for promotion who possessed a bachelor's degree in engineering or held the qualification of A.M.I.E., Section A & B and who had put in at least 7 years service in the J.K. Engineering (Gazetted) Service. This is the second of the two Rules impugned in this appeal.
8. The case of the respondents as disclosed in their petition was that under the rules of 1939, Assistant Engineers were entitled to be promoted to the higher cadre on the basis of their merit and record and no distinction was made between degree-holders and diploma-holders for the purposes of such promotion. The discrimination made by the impugned rules between degree-holders and diploma-holders was arbitrary and capricious because academic or technical qualifications could be germane only at the time of recruitment. For purposes of promotion, efficiency and experience alone must count. Respondents further contended that once the Government appointed candidates with different academic or technical qualifications to the same cadre, having the same pay scale and similar duties, such candidates would form one class and they cannot be further classified for purposes of promotion on the basis of their educational qualifications. The impugned rules, according to the respondents, brought about a reduction in rank, deprived them of equal opportunity in the matter of promotion and were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the institution of India. Finally, the respondents contended by their petition that it was not competent to the Government to change the service conditions unilaterally to the disadvantage of its employees so as to deprive them of their vested right of promotion by giving retrospective effect to the rules.
9. The appellants, by their counter affidavit, traversed these averments thus : It was within the competence of the Government to grant a higher pay scale to persons with higher educational qualifications. Under the Rules of 1968 a higher slab of pay was sanctioned for Assistant Engineers with higher educational qualifications and the qualification Bar was imposed so as to exclude diploma-holders, with a view to ensuring administrative efficiency in the Engineering service. Under the Rules of 1970, the Governor had laid down the method of recruitment and had prescribed qualifications for appointment to various categories of posts in the engineering department keeping in view the nature of duties and responsibilities attached to those posts. Classification, for purposes of promotion, on the basis of educational qualifications has an intelligible differentia and was therefore not violative of the Constitutional provisions of equality. Lastly, the appellants disputed that application of the Rules to existing employees made the Rules "retrospective" in any sense.
10. The learned single Judge who heard the petition rejected the respondents' contentions but that judgment was reversed in appeal by a Division Bench of the High Court. Briefly, the Division Bench held that though it was open to the Government to make a reasonable classification of its employees, where the employees were grouped together and integrated into one unit without reference to their qualifications, they formed a single class in spite of initial disparity in behalf of their educational qualifications and no discrimination could thereafter be made between them on the basis of such qualifications; that the discrimination made under the Rules of 1968 between diploma-holders and degree-holders was unconstitutional and that having prescribed diploma or a degree in engineering with practical experience as a minimum qualification for entry into service, it was not open to the Government to prescribe higher educational qualifications for promotion from the cadre of Assistant Engineers to that of Executive Engineers. The main judgment was delivered by Mufti Bahauddin J. who confined his view to the vice attaching to the rules by reason of their retrospectively. The learned Chief Justice, by a concurring judgment, struck down the rules for all time. They were, according to him, bad in so far as they applied to existing employees and would be bad if applied to those who may join the cadre in future.
11. The learned Attorney General, who appears on behalf of the appellants, contends that it is always open to the Government to classify its employees so long as the classification is reasonable and has nexus with the object thereof; that a classification cannot be held to infringe the equality clause unless it is actually and palpably arbitrary; that if there are different sources of recruitment, the employees recruited from different sources can either, be allowed different conditions of service and so continue to belong to different classes or the Government may integrate them into one class; that once the employees are integrated into one class, they cannot, for purposes of promotion, be classified again into two different classes on the basis of differences existing at the time of recruitment; but, after integration into one class, the employees can, in the matter of promotion, be classified into different classes on the basis of any intelligible differentia as, for example, educational qualifications, which has a nexus with the object of classification, namely efficiency in the post of promotion.
12. Mr. Setalvad who led for the respondents contended that neither at the time of appointment to the post of Assistant Engineers nor for the purposes of promotion to the post of Divisional Engineers (now called 'Executive Engineers'), was any distinction made by the rules of 1939 between diploma holders and degree-holders; that rules governing conditions of Service could not be changed retrospectively to classify employees on the basis of educational qualifications so as to deny promotion to the diploma-holders; that there was in the instant case no nexus between the classification and the object sought to be achieved thereby and in fact the classification defeated that object; that having regard to the fact that from 1939 to 1970 holders of Diplomas and Degrees were treated alike the onus lay heavily on the appellants to prove the necessity for differentiating between the two, which onus was not discharged on the record of the case; and that, if the object of the classification was the attainment of efficiency, the Government could have achieved that object, and perhaps in a better measure, by making talent, experience and efficiency as criteria for determining promotional opportunities.
13. Mr. Gupte, appearing for Respondents 18 to 29, took the stand that once there is a class of equals no discrimination can be made among them on any ground whatsoever. Therefore, if chances of promotion are denied to a few within a class of equals, there is an inherent vice attaching to the classification and no question of the reasonableness of the new yardstick can possibly arise. In the alternative, Mr. Gupte contended, possession of a degree qualification was not a reasonable basis for segregating degree-holders and diploma-holders into water tight compartments. The impugned rule of 1970 was made in the awareness that only some Assistant Engineers were graduates and the facts of the case disclosed no reasonable basis for differentiation between them and the diploma-holders in regard to promotion as Executive Engineers. Finally, the learned Counsel contended that the unreasonableness of the classification was patent from the fact that a degree qualification was prescribed as a pre-condition for promotion to the post of Executive Engineers but not to higher posts. There was neither rhyme nor reason in a rule which permitted a Diploma-holder to occupy the post of a Superintending Engineer or the highest post of a Chief Engineer but barred him from being considered for a lower post in the cadre of Executive Engineers.
14. Mr. Garg, who appears for one of the respondents, laid particular stress on the question of onus. He contended that the heavy onus, which lay on the appellants to justify the classification remained wholly undischarged in the context, especially, of the background that between 1939 and 1970 holders of Degrees and Diplomas were treated alike in the matter of promotion from the post of an Assistant Engineer to that of an Executive Engineer. A system which had stood the test of time, could not, reasonably, be proclaimed unworkable or inefficacious unless the entire context and requirements of the system had undergone some significant change. Of that, says the counsel, there is just no evidence.
15. Most of the arguments advanced for the respondents have been considered and rejected by this Court in some case or the other but before coming to that, a few points may be kept out of way.
16. An argument which found favour with Mufti Bahauddin J., one of the learned Judges of the Letters Patent Bench of the High Court, and which was repeated before us is that the "retrospective" application of the impugned rules is violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution. It is difficult to appreciate this argument and impossible to accept it. It is wrong to characterise the operation of a service rule as retrospective for the reason that it applies to existing employees. A rule which classifies such employees for promotional purposes, undoubtedly operates on those who entered service before the framing of the rule but it operates in future, in the sense that it governs the future right of promotion of those who are already in service. The impugned rules do not recall a promotion already made or reduce a pay-scale already granted. They provide for a classification by prescribing a qualitative standard, the measure of that standard being educational attainment. Whether a classification founded on such a consideration suffers from a discriminatory vice is another matter which we will presently consider but surely, the rule cannot first be assumed to be retrospective and then be struck down for the reason that it violates the guarantee of equal opportunity by extending its arms over the past. If rules governing conditions of service cannot ever operate to the prejudice of those who are already in service, the age of superannuation should have remained immutable and schemes of compulsory retirement in public interest ought to have foundered on the rock of retroactivity. But such is not the implication of service rules nor is it their true description to say that because they affect existing employees they are retrospective.