MANU/SC/0126/2018
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 2453, 2454 and 2456 of 2007
Decided On: 16.02.2018
Appellants: The State of Karnataka and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: State of Tamil Nadu and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dipak Misra, C.J.I., Amitava Roy and A.M. Khanwilkar, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Ranjit Kumar, S.G., Madhusudan R. Naik, Adv. Gen., Fali Sam Nariman, S.S. Javali, Jaideep Gupta, Shekhar Naphade, A.S. Nambiar, Rakesh Dwivedi, Subramonium Prasad, Sr. Advs., Mohan V. Katarki, S.C. Sharma, Brijesh Kalappa, R.S. Ravi, V.N. Raghupathy, J.M. Gangadhar, Ranvir Singh, Abdul Azeem Kalebudde, G. Prakash, Jishnu M.L., Priyanka Prakash, Beena Prakash, Vijay Shankar, Kunal Chattarjee, Saurabh Gupta, G. Umapathy, C. Paramasivam, K.V. Vijaya Kumar, B. Balaji, S. Wasim, A. Quadri, Madhavi Divan, Ajay Sharrna, Snidha Mehra, Hemant Arya, Saudamini Sharma, Kriti Dua, Somya Rathore, Sumit, D.S. Mahra, M.K. Maroria, R. Nedumaran, V.G. Pragasam, S. Prabhu Ramasubramanian, P.K. Manohar, Shantha Vasudevan, Manu Sundaram, M.R. Ramesh Babu, Rajesh Mahale, Ajit S. Bhasme, Aparna Bhat and Supreeta Sharanagouda, Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA - Article 363
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 2, Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 3, Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 3(1), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 4, Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 5, Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 5(1), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 5(2), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 5(3), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 6, Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 6(1), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 6(2), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 6(7), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 6A, Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 6A(1), Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 7, Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 - Section 11; Inter-State Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1980;Government of India Act, 1935 [Repealed] - Section 5, Government of India Act, 1935 [Repealed] - Section 6, Government of India Act, 1935 [Repealed] - Section 6(5), Government of India Act, 1935 [Repealed] - Section 177, Government of India Act, 1935 [Repealed] - Section 177(1); Government of India Act, 1915-19 [Repealed] - Section 30; Indian Independence Act, 1947 - Section 7, Indian Independence Act, 1947 - Section 7(1); States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 2, States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 3(1), States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 7, States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 87, States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 87(1), States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 107, States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 108, States Reorganisation Act 1956 - Section 119; Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 - Section 2, Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 - Section 88; Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 - Section 2, Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 - Section 84, Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 - Section 85; Kerala Irrigation and Water Conservation Act, 2003; Kerala Irrigation and Water Conservation (Amendment) Act, 2006; Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 16, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 19, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 19A, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 23, Indian Contract Act, 1872 - Section 24; Indian Arbitration Act, 1899; Consumer Protection Act, 1986; Pharmacy act - Section 10, Pharmacy act - Section 11, Pharmacy act - Section 30, Pharmacy act - Section 31; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 60(1), Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 80; Cauvery River Authority (Conduct of Business) Rules, 1998; Delhi Road Transport Authority (Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regulations, 1952 - Regulation 9; Constitution of India - Article 3, Constitution of India - Article 4, Constitution of India - Article 12, Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 32, Constitution of India - Article 131, Constitution of India - Article 132, Constitution of India - Article 133, Constitution of India - Article 134, Constitution of India - Article 135, Constitution of India - Article 136, Constitution of India - Article 142, Constitution of India - Article 143, Constitution of India - Article 213, Constitution of India - Article 261(2), Constitution of India - Article 262, Constitution of India - Article 262(1), Constitution of India - Article 262(2), Constitution of India - Article 263, Constitution of India - Article 291, Constitution of India - Article 294B, Constitution of India - Article 295, Constitution of India - Article 295(2), Constitution of India - Article 363, Constitution of India - Article 363(1), Constitution of India - Article 366(22), Constitution of India - Article 372, Constitution of India - Article 374(2), Constitution of India - Article 395; Indian (Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947; Seraikella and Kharsawan States Order, 1948; Karnataka Cauvery Basin Irrigation Protection Ordinance, 1991
Cases Referred:
State of Karnataka vs. State of Tamil Nadu and Ors. MANU/SC/1571/2016; State of Tamil Nadu vs. State of Karnataka and Ors. MANU/SC/0643/1991; Dr. Babu Ram Saksena vs. The State MANU/SC/0016/1950; H.H. Maharajadhiraja Madhav Rao Jivaji Rao Scindia Bahadur of Gwalior and Ors. vs. Union of India and Anr. MANU/SC/0050/1970; State of Tamil Nadu vs. State of Kerala and Anr. MANU/SC/0425/2014; Mullaperiyar Environmental Protection Forum vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/8074/2006; Virendra Singh and Ors. vs. The State of Uttar Pradesh MANU/SC/0025/1954; State of Seraikella vs. Union of India (UOI) and Anr. MANU/SC/0006/1951; In the matter of : Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal MANU/SC/0097/1992; Maharaja Shree Umaid Mills Ltd. vs. Union of India (UOI) MANU/SC/0246/1962; New Bihar Biri Leaves Co. and Ors. vs. State of Bihar and Ors. MANU/SC/0068/1981; Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and Anr. vs. Brojo Nath Ganguly and Anr. MANU/SC/0439/1986; O.P. Bhandari vs. Indian Tourism Development Corpn. Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0475/1986; Delhi Transport Corporation vs. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress and others MANU/SC/0031/1991; Balmer Lawrie and Co. Ltd. and Ors. vs. Partha Sarathi Sen Roy and Ors. MANU/SC/0171/2013; West Bengal State Electricity Board and Ors. vs. Desh Bandhu Ghosh and Ors. MANU/SC/0374/1985; Dalmia Dadri Cement Co. Ltd. vs. The Commissioner of Income Tax MANU/SC/0084/1958; Amar Chand Butail vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0330/1964; Firm Bansidhar Premsukhdas vs. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0045/1966; State of Punjab and Ors. vs. Balbir Singh and Ors. MANU/SC/0483/1975; State of Madhya Pradesh vs. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd. MANU/SC/0099/1964; Sher Singh and Ors. vs. Financial Commissioner of Planning, Punjab and Ors. MANU/SC/0946/1987; Union of India and Anr. vs. Tulsiram Patel and Ors. MANU/SC/0373/1985; Satyavir Singh and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0368/1985; A.K. Kaul and another vs. Union of India and another MANU/SC/0267/1995; Ganga Kumar Srivastava vs. The State of Bihar MANU/SC/0420/2005; P.S.R. Sadhanantham vs. Arunachalam and Anr. MANU/SC/0083/1980; Bengal Chemical & Pharmaceutical Works Ltd., Calcutta vs. Their Workmen MANU/SC/0118/1959; Jose Da Costa and Anr. vs. Bascora Sadasiva Sinai Narcornim and Ors. MANU/SC/0054/1975; Ram Piari vs. Bhagwant and others MANU/SC/0306/1990; Phulchand Exports Ltd. vs. OOO Patriot MANU/SC/1217/2011; Crompton Parkinson (Works) Private Ltd., Bombay vs. Its Workmen and Ors. MANU/SC/0130/1959; Vashit Narain Sharma vs. Dev Chandra and Ors. MANU/SC/0101/1954; Ram Bharosey Agarwal vs. Har Swarup Maheshwari MANU/SC/0018/1976; Jamshed Hormusji Wadia vs. Board of Trustees, Port of Mumbai and Anr. MANU/SC/0033/2004; Tamil Nadu Cauvery Neerppasana Vilaiporulgal Vivasayigal Nala Urimai Padhugappu Sangam vs. Union of India and others MANU/SC/0253/1990; Atlas Cycle Industries Ltd. and Ors. vs. The State of Haryana MANU/SC/0135/1978; Common Cause vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0799/2003; K.T. Plantation Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. vs. State of Karnataka MANU/SC/0914/2011; Hukam Chand etc. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0506/1972
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.02.2007 of the Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal at New Delhi under Section 5(2) of the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956
Authorities Referred:
Black's Law Dictionary, Bryan Garner, Editor-Chief (10th Edition, Thomson Reuters); John Westlake International Law: Part-I. Peace, Cambridge University Press, 1910; Rivers in International Law (1959), F.J. Berber; L. Oppenheim International Law (8th Edition); Chitty on Contracts (25th Edition, Vol. I); American Law Institute, Volume II; Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Volume 49(2); Manual of Water Supply and Treatment (3rd Edition); Shiva Rao (Ed.), The Framing of India's Constitution-Select Documents, Volume IV, at p. 434
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  22

Mentioned
  33

HIGH COURT Status:
Judgment challenged vide MANU/SC/0589/2018 dated: 18.05.2018
Case Note:
Environment - Unconscientiously - Determination - Article 363 of Constitution of India - Present appeal filed challenging order wherein States, aggrieved by allocation, sharing of water of river - whether, even paramountcy lapsed, agreements of commercial, economic or financial character between States and British Government, be legally effective - Whether State unconscientiously using superior power

Facts:

A dispute arises between the States regarding the use of water from river flowing across them. The dispute led to the Arbitration wherein an award was passed. Present appeal was filed challenging this award as it was contended that the State of Karnataka was not complying with the directions given by the Tribunal in its order and that the said order was flagrantly violated. It was urged that State of Karnataka instead of releasing 10000 cusecs per day was releasing 20000 cusecs of water per day which led to the filing of present petition. In the year 1881, the Viceroy and the Governor General of India, by an Instrument of Transfer 1881, restored the administration of the Princely State of Mysore by signing the "Sanad" described as "Instrument of Transfer". The State of Karnataka contended that the "Instrument of Transfer" placed the Maharaja in possession of the territories of Mysore and in the administration thereof, and declared that he would be entitled to hold possession thereof and administer them only so long as he fulfilled the conditions prescribed in the Instrument of Transfer.

Held, while partially allowing appeal:

(i) The present Court noted that after coming into force of the 1947 Act, the doctrine of paramountcy had no room for application as the Government of India became the full sovereign authority. The two agreements of 1892 and 1924 had neither any political arrangement nor touched any facet of sovereignty of India. Per contra, the agreements cover the areas of larger public interest which did not have any political element and in this backdrop; the agreements are neither inoperative nor completely extinct. The issues in this case had no connection, whatsoever, with the concepts of sovereignty and integrity of India and, therefore, the bar under Article 363 of the Constitution of India is not attracted. Even if the contention that the State of Karnataka did not have any bargaining power at the time of entering into the agreements was accepted, the State of Karnataka acquired the said bargaining power after the 1947 Act, and definitely after coming into force the Constitution of India. Regardless of the same, the State of Karnataka chose not to denounce the said agreements. Therefore, the said agreements could not be said to be unconscionable. In view the various intricacies involved in the case at hand and the duty ordained upon this Court by the Constitution of India, the matter deserved to be adjudicated on the bedrock of equal status of the states and doctrine of equitability. Resultantly, the submission that the State of Tamil Nadu did not warrant any adjudication, did not commend any acceptation. After considering all relevant materials brought on record, the present Court was of the view that having regard to imperative of economy of consumption of water, the final determination of irrigated area arrived at by the Tribunal for Tamil Nadu, could not be declared incorrect or fallacious. Drinking water requirement of the overall population of all the States has to be placed on a higher pedestal as we treat it as a hierarchically fundamental principle of equitable distribution. [404]
JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, C.J.I.
INDEX
S. No.
Heading
A.
The proceedings in this Court in the present Appeals
B.
Maintainability of the Appeals by Special Leave
C.
Stand of all parties pertaining to remand of the matter to the Tribunal after deliberation of the legal issues
D.
Reference of the dispute to the Tribunal
E.
The initial proceedings before the Tribunal
F.
The issue of Ordinance by the State of Karnataka and the Presidential Reference
G.
The genesis of the controversy
H.
Doctrine of Paramountcy and its extinction on coming into force of the Indian Independence Act, 1947
I.
Infraction of Article 363 and non-maintainability of the dispute on the basis of agreements
J.
Unconscionability of the 1892 and 1924 agreements
K.
Status of the agreements after coming into force of the States Reorganization Act, 1956
L.
Issue relating to expiry of the agreements
M.
Did the complaint not require any adjudication?
N.
The approach adopted by the Tribunal post 1974 and correctness of the same
O.
The quintessence of pleadings before the Tribunal
P.
The findings of the Tribunal on various issues
  P.1
Prescriptive rights and other claims
  P.2
Breach of agreements of 1892 and 1924 and consequences thereof
  P.3
Peripheral issues qua claims of Kerala and Union Territory of Pondicherry (presently named as "Puducherry")
  P.4
Gross water available for apportionment
  P.4(i)
Surface flow of water
  P.4(ii)
Identification of dependable yield
  P.4(iii)
Additional source of water
  P.5
The principles of apportionment
  P.6
Determination of "irrigated areas" in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
  P.7
Assessment of water for "irrigation needs" in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
  P.8
Assessment of water for "Domestic and Industrial Purposes" in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
  P.9
Assessment of water for "Environment Protection and Inevitable Escapages into Sea" in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
  P.10
Water allocation for the State of Kerala and Union Territory of Pondicherry (presently named as "Puducherry")
  P.11
Final water allocation amongst competing States
  P.12
Monthly schedule for delivery of water at inter-State contact points
Q.
Mechanism (Cauvery Management Board) for implementation of Tribunal's decisions
R.
Final order of the Tribunal
S.
Arguments advanced on behalf of State of Karnataka as regards the allocation of water on various heads
  S.1
Submissions of Mr. Fali S. Nariman
  S.2
Submissions of Mr. S.S. Javali
  S.3
Contention raised by Mr. Mohan v. Katarki
  S.4
Preponement of Mr. Shyam Divan
T.
Arguments put forth by the State of Tamil Nadu
  T.1
Submissions of Mr. ShekharNaphade
  T.2
Contentions raised by Mr. RakeshDwivedi
U.
Arguments advanced on behalf of the State of Kerala
V.
Submissions urged on behalf of Union Territory of Puducherry
W.
Arguments on behalf of Union of India
X.
Our findings on issues of allocation
  X.1
Principles of apportionment to be followed
  X.2
Determination of 'irrigated areas" in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
  X.3
Assessment of water for "irrigation needs" in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka
  X.4
Water allocation for the State of Kerala
  X.5
Water allocation for the Union Territory of Puducherry
  X.6
Recognition of ground water as an additional source in Tamil Nadu
  X.7
Water allocation for Domestic and Industrial purposes in Tamil Nadu
  X.8
Water allocation for Domestic and Industrial purposes of State of Karnataka
  X.9
Allocation of water towards environmental protection
  X.10
Revised water allocation amongst competing States
Y.
Interpretation of Section 6A of the 1956 Act
Z.
The conclusions in seriatim
1. In this batch of Appeals, the assail is to the award dated 05.02.2007 passed by the Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal (for brevity, "the Tribunal") constituted Under Section 3 of the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 (for brevity, "the 1956 Act") by three States, namely, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala as each of them is aggrieved by the allocation and sharing of water of river Cauvery according to individual perception, perspective and understanding. It is worthy to mention here that there are two principal States, namely, State of Karnataka and State of Tamil Nadu who as adversaries take the centre stage. The other two, State of Kerala and Union Territory of Pondicherry (presently named as "Puducherry") in their own way, attacked the award and also seriously criticized the stand and stance of the main protagonists because of their dominant, assertive and adamant attitude by which they not only feel neglected and discriminated but have also been compelled to harbour the idea that two of them have created impediment in their rightful due concerning the release of water.
A. The proceedings in this Court in the present Appeals
2. Before the hearing of the Appeals commenced, on being moved by the State of Tamil Nadu, State of Karnataka and the Central Government, certain orders came to be passed. It is necessary to adumbrate the nature of orders passed by this Court, for without the said narration, it will be an incomplete narrative. We may immediately state that we shall devote some space to the genesis of the disputes as it travels beyond 100 years and the learned Counsel for the parties have argued with vigour and energy in that regard. The said submissions shall be noted and addressed in due course. Be it noted, at one stage, the issue of entertainability of the appeals by special leave was raised by the Union of India and this Court had to deal with it and delivered a judgment in State of Karnataka v. State of Tamil Nadu and Ors. MANU/SC/1571/2016 : (2017) 3 SCC 362. Certain other orders also reflected the stand of the contesting States and where and how they were to be guided by the cherished principle of Rule of law by accepting the order of the Court and not take a deviant path.
3. Though the award was passed on 5th February, 2007, yet it was published by requisite notification dated 19th February, 2013. On 10.05.2013, in I.A. No. 5/2013 in Civil Appeal No. 2456 of 2007, a two-Judge Bench, taking note of the notification dated 19th February, 2013 and also considering the fact that the said notification was under consideration of the Central Government, passed an order constituting a Supervisory Committee as a pro tem measure for implementation of the final order of the Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal dated February 5, 2007 which was notified vide notification dated February 19, 2013. The two-Judge Bench ordered that the said Supervisory Committee shall consist of Secretary, Union Ministry of Water Resources as Chairman and the Chief Secretaries of the respective States of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Union Territory of Puducherry as members.
4. The order clarified that the aforesaid pro tem arrangement was without prejudice to the pending civil appeals, namely, Civil Appeal Nos. 2453 of 2007, 2454 of 2007 and 2456 of 2007. Further, the order granted liberty to the Central Government to apply for modification of the said arrangement as and when necessary.
5. I.A. No. 10 of 2016 in Civil Appeal No. 2456 of 2007 was filed by the State of Tamil Nadu wherein Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior Counsel who had appeared for the applicant, had contended that the State of Karnataka had not been complying with the directions given by the Tribunal in its final order and that the said order had been flagrantly violated. Further, during the course of arguments, Mr. Naphade had pointed out that if the water was not released by the State of Karnataka, the 'samba' crops would be absolutely damaged which would lead to an unacceptable plight to be faced by the farmers of the State of Tamil Nadu.
6. Per contra, Mr. Fali S. Nariman, learned senior Counsel who had appeared for the State of Karnataka, had drawn the attention of the Bench to paragraph 'D' of Clause IX of the final order of the Tribunal which reads as under:
D. The Authority shall properly monitor the working of monthly Schedule with the help of the concerned States and Central Water Commission for a period of five years and if any modification/adjustment is needed in the Schedule thereafter, it may be worked out in consultation with the party States, and help of Central Water Commission for future adoption without changing the annual allocation amongst the parties.
Learned senior Counsel for the State of Karnataka had submitted that it is obligatory on the part of the State of Tamil Nadu to approach the Supervisory Committee that was constituted vide notification dated 22nd May, 2013. Mr. Nariman had also drawn the attention of the Bench to paragraphs 2 and 3 of the notification which deal with the constitution and the role of the Supervisory Committee.
For better appreciation, we think it condign to reproduce the said paragraphs. They read as under:
Constitution of the Supervisory Committee:
(1) There shall be a Committee under this scheme to be known as the Supervisory Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Committee).
(2) The Committee referred to in Sub-rule (1) shall consist of the following, namely:
3. Role of the Committee: The role of the Committee shall be to give effect to the implementation of the Order dated the 5th February, 2007 of the Tribunal:
Provided that in case of any doubt or difficulty, the Chairman, Supervisory Committee and, if necessary, any of the parties may apply to Hon'ble Supreme Court for appropriate directions with notice to the other States and the Union Territory.
During the course of proceedings of the said I.A. No. 10 of 2016, Mr. Nariman, learned Senior Counsel handed over a note to the Bench which contained certain suggestions, foremost of them being that the State of Karnataka shall release 10000 cusecs per day (about 0.86 TMC) from 7th September, 2016 to 12th September, 2016. Mr. Naphade, on the other hand, submitted that instead of 10000 cusecs per day (about 0.86 TMC), there should be release of 20000 cusecs of water per day.
7. The Bench, after giving a patient hearing to the learned Counsel for both the parties, passed an order on 5th September, 2016 in the following terms:
(a) The applicant, the State of Tamil Nadu, shall approach the Supervisory Committee within three days from today. Response, if any, by the State of Karnataka be filed within three days therefrom.
(b) The Supervisory Committee shall pass appropriate direction in this regard within four days from the date of filing of the reference keeping in view the language employed in the final order of the Tribunal. Be it clarified, the Supervisory Committee is bound by the language used in the order passed by the Tribunal.
(c) Coming to the immediate arrangement, keeping in view the gesture shown by the State of Karnataka and the plight that has been projected with agony by Mr. Naphade, we think it appropriate to direct that 15 cusecs of water per day be released at Biligundulu by the State of Karnataka for ten days.
(d) The State of Tamil Nadu is directed to release water proportionately to the Union Territory of Puducherry.
8. On 06.09.2016, the matter was taken up as there was a mistake as the order dated 05.09.2016 incorrectly mentioned 10 cusecs and 20 cusecs in paragraph 1 and 15 cusecs in sub-paragraph (c) which required to be read as 10000 cusecs, 20000 cusecs and 15000 cusecs respectively. The corrections were carried out on that day.
9. An application for modification of the order dated 05.09.2016, viz., I.A. No. 12 of 2016 in I.A. No. 10 of 2016 in Civil Appeal No. 2456 of 2007 was mentioned on 11.09.2016 which was taken up on 12.09.2016 on the basis of an affidavit for urgent hearing.
10. Vide paragraph 3 of the said affidavit, the deponent had submitted that modification of the interim order dated 5th September, 2016 passed by this Court was necessary because of spontaneous agitations in various parts of the State of Karnataka which had paralyzed normal life and resulted in destruction of public and private properties worth hundreds of crores of rupees. The deponent had further submitted that modification was required having regard to the ground realities, needs and requirements as stated in the application.
11. The Court, after perusal of the said affidavit and the annexed application for modification, noted that the application contained certain averments which cannot be conceived of to be filed in a court of law seeking modification of an earlier order. The Court categorically stated that agitation in spontaneity or propelled by some motivation or galvanized by any kind of catalystic component can never form the foundation for seeking modification of an order. The Court observed that its order was bound to be complied with by all concerned and it is the obligation of the executive to maintain law and order and to see that the Court's order is complied with in letter and spirit. The Court further observed that citizens cannot become law unto themselves; and when a court of law passes an order, it is the sacred duty of the citizens to obey the same. The Court also expressed anguish over the pleadings in the application and also the affidavit filed for urgency and deplored the same.
12. Mr. Nariman, learned senior Counsel appearing for the State of Karnataka, unequivocally accepted during the hearing that the aforesaid affidavit was erroneously drafted. However, he contended that the prayer in essence required reconsideration of the order. The Court thereafter proceeded to deal with the preponement of Mr. Nariman in respect of the reliefs sought for in the application. The application mainly sought for the modification of order of this Court dated 05.09.2016 (as corrected on 06.09.2016) and an order to the effect to keep in abeyance Clause (c) of the directions of this Court in its order dated 05.09.2016 as corrected on 06.09.2016.
13. After giving due consideration to the exhaustive arguments presented by the Senior Counsel for both the States, the Court was of the view that the prayer of abeyance did not deserve acceptance and, accordingly, rejected the same. As far as the prayer for modification was concerned, the Court modified the order dated 5th September, 2016 to the extent that the State of Karnataka shall release 12000 cusecs of water per day and that the said direction shall remain in force till 20th September, 2016. The Court also directed the Supervisory Committee to arrive at a decision in conformity with the final order of the Tribunal with respect to the situation of shortage of water and plight of farmers in both the States.
14. On 20.9.2016, I.A. No. 12 of 2016 in I.A. No. 6 of 2016 in Civil Appeal No. 2456 of 2007 was taken up. After referring to its earlier orders, the Court considered the submissions advanced by the learned Counsel for the parties and took note of the directions of the Tribunal for consideration of constituting the Cauvery Management Board. The Court, thereafter, directed the Union of India to constitute the Cauvery Management Board within four weeks and produce before the Court after four weeks the notification indicating that the said Board has been constituted. As an interim measure, the Court directed the State of Karnataka to release 6000 cusecs of water from 21st September, 2016 till 27th September, 2016.
15. On 27.09.2016, the Court sought the assistance of the learned Attorney General for India to apprise the Central Government to discuss with both the States so that an interim solution could be arrived at. On 30.09.2016, the minutes of the proceedings were produced by learned Attorney General for India and Mr. Nariman, learned senior Counsel appearing for the State of Karnataka, produced two letters and requested the same to be taken on record and the said prayer was acceded to. Proceeding further, however, the Court modified the order dated 5th September, 2016. The two letters pertained to the communication between Mr. Nariman and the State Government relating to compliance of this Court's order. It is not necessary to refer to the episode in detail. It is worthy to state here that on 04.10.2016, the matter was taken up as it was mentioned by the learned Attorney General for India. The mentioning related to modification of the earlier order. On that day, as the order of this Court was complied with and that sage controversy was put to rest. Mr. Nariman assisted the Court. We think it necessary to state here that Mr. Nariman had courageously lived upto the highest tradition of the Bar and we had recorded our uninhibited accession. Be it noted, after hearing learned Counsel for the parties and Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Attorney General for India, the Court constituted a High Power Technical Team to arrive at an interim solution and directed the State of Karnataka to release 2000 cusecs of water from 7.10.2016 till 18.10.2016.
16. On the next date of hearing, i.e., 18.10.2016, the report of the Committee was filed but it was noticed that the Committee had not suggested anything with regard to the quantity of water. At this juncture, the learned Attorney General for India submitted that the appeals are not maintainable. The same stand was taken by Mr. A.S. Nambiar, learned senior Counsel appearing for the Union Territory of Puducherry. On that day, the issue also arose for consideration of the nature of the interim order. Regarding the release of 2000 cusecs of water from 7.10.2016, it was submitted by Mr. Madhusudan R. Naik, learned Advocate General of Karnataka assisting Mr. Nariman for the State of Karnataka, that the order dated 18.10.2016 had been complied with. After noticing the submissions with regard to the release of water by way of interim measure, it was decided to hear the matter on merits. On that day, the earlier order passed by this Court was reiterated to the effect that the executive of both the States shall see to it that peace and harmony would be maintained in both the States and that the citizens do not become law unto themselves. Further, it was ordered that it would be the obligation of the executive to ensure that when the matter is heard and the interim order has been passed and that when the State of Karnataka is complying with the order, mutuality of respect between both the States and the citizens should be maintained. The order further impressed upon the fact that maintenance of law and order and care for public property is a sign of elevated democracy.
17. We have paraphrased the interim orders as we are disposed to think that they deserve to be reproduced as the same is necessary for what we are going to say in the final judgment.
B. Maintainability of the Appeals by Special Leave
18. As stated earlier, the learned Attorney General for India raised the issue with regard to the maintainability of the appeals. In the reported judgment State of Karnataka (supra), the Court has held that when judged by the principles of statutory interpretation to understand the legislative intendment of Section 6(2), it is clear as crystal that the Parliament did not intend to create any kind of embargo on the jurisdiction of this Court. The said provision was inserted to give the binding effect to the award passed by the Tribunal. The Court opined that the fiction has been created for that limited purpose. Section 11 of the 1956 Act bars the jurisdiction of the courts and needless to say, that is in consonance with the language employed in Article 262 of the Constitution. The Founding Fathers had not conferred the power on this Court to entertain an original suit or complaint and that is luminescent from the language employed in Article 131 of the Constitution and from the series of pronouncements of this Court. The Court further held that Section 6 cannot be interpreted in an absolute mechanical manner and the words "same force as an order or decision" cannot be treated as an order or decree for the purpose of excluding the jurisdiction of this Court. Elaborating the same, it was held that it cannot be a decree as if this Court has adjudicated a matter and passed a decree. The Parliament has intended that the same shall be executed or abided as if it is a decree of this Court. The Court further ruled that a provision should not be interpreted to give a different colour which has a technical design rather than serving the object of the legislation. The exposition of the principles of law relating to fiction, the intendment of the legislature and the ultimate purpose and effect of the provision compelled the Court to repel the submissions raised on behalf of the Union of India that Section 6(2) bars the jurisdiction conferred on this Court Under Article 136. At that stage, the Court clarified in the following words:
We would like to clarify one aspect. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the State of Karnataka as well as the State of Tamil Nadu have commended us to various authorities which we have already referred to in the context of Article 136 of the Constitution, but the purpose behind the said delineation is to show the broad canvas of the aforesaid constitutional provision in the context of maintainability of the civil appeals. How the final order passed by the Tribunal would be adjudged within the parameters of the said constitutional provision has to be debated when we finally address the controversy pertaining to the subject-matter of the civil appeals.
19. Referring to para 82 of the judgment, it is submitted by Mr. Nariman, learned senior Counsel for the State of Karnataka, that this Court should exercise the wide powers bestowed in it Under Article 136 of the Constitution in a case of this nature and exercise its discretion. Similar was the submission of learned senior Counsel appearing for the other States. Be it clarified that each one is a contesting Appellant as also Respondent.
20. Keeping in view the controversy at hand, we think it appropriate to advert to the other legal issues and appreciate the factual score on the required parameters which will be unfolded in the course of our deliberations. We do not presently intend to state it as wide or broad approach or restricted or narrow approach. The said concept shall be dwelled upon at the relevant stage.
C. Stand of all parties pertaining to remand of the matter to the Tribunal after deliberation of the legal issues
21. At the commencement of the hearing of the appeals, a serious criticism was advanced on behalf of the State of Karnataka that after the hearing before the Tribunal was closed, the State of Tamil Nadu filed an affidavit which was marked as TN Ext. 1665 and when objections were raised, the Tribunal had assured that the said document would not be relied upon but unfortunately the Tribunal had referred to the contents of the affidavit and relied upon the same. Be it noted, the said affidavit came into existence because of the suo motu order passed by the Tribunal on 12.11.2002 which is as follows:
During the course of hearing of arguments it transpired that most of the riparian States which are party to the proceedings cultivate paddy and allow at least 2-3 inches of water to remain in fields throughout till the crop matures. We are told that this is the traditional practice which is being followed:
In many States in India paddy crops, after transplantation, are watered from time to time and a particular level of water need not remain in the fields throughout. It need not be pointed out that traditional practice, which is being followed in Cauvery basin states obviously will consume and require more water in the fields.
Since 1973, different recommendations have been made requesting the riparian States before us to practice economy while utilizing waters of river Cauvery.
Learned Additional Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu stated that during last several years, steps have been taken to improve the water use efficiency. Similar stand has been taken on behalf of the States of Karnataka, Kerala and the Union Territory of Pondicherry.
It need not be impressed that it better scientific methods are adopted in cultivation of paddy, the requirement of water is bound to be less.
All the party States and the Union Territory of Pondicherry shall file their respective Affidavits within six weeks from today, as to what steps have already been taken to reduce the requirement of water for cultivation and what steps are likely to be taken in near future. In the Affidavit it should also be stated as to what minimum delta is required for different crop varieties in their respective States.
22. It is assiduously urged that though the said affidavit has been filed in reply to the affidavits filed by the State of Karnataka in pursuance of the suo motu order passed by the Tribunal, yet the affidavit of the State of Tamil Nadu for the first time furnished its scientific crop water requirement, that is, a detailed statement of computed crop water requirement system fed by Mettur and other schemes in the basin and the Tribunal, contrary to the principles of law of evidence and in violation of the principal facet of natural justice, took the same on record and marked it as Ext. 1665. The Tribunal, as averred by the Senior Counsel for the State of Karnataka, had clarified that the affidavit filed by Tamil Nadu would not be relied upon in support of its case and that the case would be considered on the facts and documents already brought on record.
23. The said submission was equally seriously resisted by the State of Tamil Nadu by stating that the said affidavit did not contain anything new but was only a compilation of the materials already brought on record. As the debate continued, it was suggested to the learned Counsel for the parties whether it would be advisable to remit the matter to the Tribunal on the said score. At this juncture, Mr. Nariman, learned senior Counsel appearing for the State of Karnataka, submitted that considering more than 27 years had elapsed from the date of constituting the Tribunal and also considering that all the State parties to the dispute were before this Court and that each of them had challenged the Tribunal's final order, it would be appropriate for this Court to exercise its authority Under Article 136 of the Constitution of India and decide the matter finally. He submitted that as per judicial pronouncements, the power of this Court Under Article 136 read with Article 142 being plenary, is exercisable outside the purview of ordinary law in cases where the need of justice demands interference as in the present case. The current dispute is a unique one affecting the lives of millions of people and the stakes involved are unparalleled. He submitted that remanding the matter to the Tribunal for fresh consideration would be an exercise in futility and a drain on the resources of all the parties concerned which must be eschewed.
24. We may fruitfully state here that all the learned Counsel, at least on this issue, unanimously stated that the remand is no solution to such a dispute and this Court should decide the legal and factual issues so that the controversy is put to rest. Thereafter, the hearing of the appeals continued. Accordingly, we shall proceed to decide the various legal issues which are of priority and upmost concern and thereafter advert to the approach to be adopted in the obtaining factual matrix.
D. Reference of the dispute to the Tribunal
25. The State of Tamil Nadu lodged a request before the Government of India raising a water dispute and requesting for adjudication of the same by a Tribunal constituted Under Section 3 of the 1956 Act. In the said complaint dated 6th July, 1986, it was stated on behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu that a water dispute had arisen with the Government of Karnataka by reason of the fact that the interests of the State of Tamil Nadu and the inhabitants thereof in the waters of Cauvery, which is an inter-State river, had been prejudicially affected. The relevant part of the said communication reads as follows:
(a) the executive action taken by the Karnataka State in constructing Kabini, Hemavathi, Harangi, Swrnavathi and other projects and expanding the aycut-
(i) Which executive action has resulted in materially diminishing the supply of waters to Tamil Nadu.
(ii) Which executive action has materially affected the prescriptive rights of the ayacutdar already acquired and existing;
(iii) Which executive action is also in violation of the 1892 and 1924 agreements; and
(b) the failure of the Karnataka Government to implement distribution and control of the Cauvery waters.
The bilateral negotiations hitherto held between the States of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have totally failed.
Also all sincere attempts so far made by the Government of India to settle this long pending water dispute by negotiations since 1970 have totally failed.
Therefore, this request is made by the Government of Tamil Nadu to the Government of India Under Section 3 of the Inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 to refer this water dispute to a Tribunal.
26. The complaint referred to the matters connected with the dispute and the efforts made for settling the disputes by negotiations. The broad features pointed out are the "River Cauvery", "Development of Irrigation in the Cauvery Basin", "The Inter-State Agreements of 1892 and 1924", "Violation of the aforesaid two agreements by Karnataka", "Tamil Nadu's concern", "Tamil Nadu's first call for adjudication in September, 1969", "Tamil Nadu's formal request for adjudication in February, 1970", Tamil Nadu's continued participation in the discussion and negotiations", "Filing of suit by Tamil Nadu in the Supreme Court", "Prime Minister's advice", "The Cauvery Fact Finding Committee (CFFC)", "Consideration of the proposals put forth by the Union Government", "Last bilateral discussions with Karnataka held on 23rd November, 1985", "Chief Ministers' meeting held at Bangalore (now known as Bengaluru) on 16 June, 1986" and the narration of the events. Thereafter, there was a request for expeditious action for referring the dispute to the Tribunal. The said part reads as follows:
From 1974-75 onwards, the Government of Karnataka has been impounding all the flows in their reservoirs. Only after their reservoirs are filled up, the surplus flows are let down. The injury inflicted on this State in the past decade due to the unilateral action of Karnataka and the suffering we had in running around for a few TMC of water every time the crops reached the withering stage has been briefly stated in note (Enclosure-XXVIII). It is patent that the Government of Karnataka have badly violated the inter-State agreements and caused irreparable harm to the age old irrigation in this State. Year after year, the realisation at Mettur is falling fast and thousands of acres in our ayacut in the basin are forced to remain fallow. The bulk of the existing ayacut in Tamil Nadu concentrated mainly in Thanjavur and Thiruchirappalli districts is already gravely affected in that the cultivation operations are getting long delayed, traditional double crop lands are getting reduced to single crop lands and crops even in the single crop lands are withering and failing for want of adequate wettings at crucial times. We are convinced that the inordinate delay in solving the dispute is taken advantage of by the Government of Karnataka in extending their canal systems and their ayacut in the new projects and every day of delay is adding to the injury caused to our existing irrigation.
The Government of Tamil Nadu are of the firm view that the "water dispute with the Government of Karnataka has arisen by reason of the fact that the interests of the State of Tamil Nadu and the inhabitants thereof in the waters of Cauvery, which is an inter-State liver have been affected prejudicially by -
(a) the executive action taken by the Karnataka State in constructing Kabini, Hemavathi, Harangi, Swarnavathi and other projects and expanding the ayacuts:
(i) which executive action has resulted in materially diminishing the supply of waters to Tamil Nadu;
(ii) which executive action has materially affected the prescriptive rights of the avacutdars already acquired and 'existing; and
(iii) which executive action is also in violation of the 1892 and 1924 Agreements; and
(b) the failure of the Karnataka Government, to implement the terms of the 1892 and 1924 Agreements relating to the use, distribution and control of the Cauvery waters.
The bilateral negotiations hitherto held between the States of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have totally failed.
Also all sincere attempts so far made by the Government of India to settle this long pending water dispute by negotiations since 1970 have, totally failed.
I am therefore to request the Central Government to refer the Cauvery Water Dispute to a Tribunal for adjudication under the provisions of Section 4 of the inter-State Water Disputes Act, 1956 without any delay.
27. On the basis of the aforesaid letter of request, the Central Government, by the notification dated June 2, 1990, constituted the Tribunal and passed the following order of reference:
No. 21/1/90-WD
Government of India
(Bharat Sarkar)
Ministry of Water Resources
(Jal Sansadhan Mantralaya)
New Delhi, June 2, 1990
Reference
In the exercise of the powers conferred by Sub-section (1) of Section 5, of the Interstate Water Disputes Act, 1956 (33 of 1956), the Central Government hereby refers to the Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal for adjudication, the water disputes regarding the interstate river Cauvery and the river valley thereof, emerging from Letter No. 17527/K2/82-110 dated July 6, 1986 from the Government of Tamil Nadu (copy enclosed).
By order and in the name of the President of India
(M.A. Chitale)
Secretary, (Water Resources)
Chairman,
The Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal,
New Delhi
E. The initial proceedings before the Tribunal
28. During the pendency of the reference, the Government of Tamil Nadu filed CMP No. 4 of 1990 praying that the State of Karnataka be directed not to impound or utilize the water of Cauvery river beyond the extent impounded or utilized by them as on May 31, 1972 as agreed to by the Chief Ministers of the basin States and the Union of India for irrigation and power. It was also prayed that an order be passed restraining the State of Karnataka from notifying any new projects, dams, reservoirs, canals, etc., and/or from proceeding further with the construction of projects, dams, reservoirs, canals, etc., in the Cauvery basin. The Union Territory of Puducherry filed CMP No. 5 of 1990 on 8.9.1990 seeking an interim order directing the State of Karnataka and Kerala to release the water already agreed to during the months of September to March. An emergent petition was filed by the State of Tamil Nadu forming the subject matter of CMP No. 9 of 1990 to direct the State of Karnataka to release at least 20 TMC of water as the first installment pending formal orders in CMP No. 4 of 1990. The said prayers were seriously opposed by the State of Karnataka and the State of Kerala on merits as well as on a preliminary objection that the Tribunal had no power or jurisdiction to entertain the said petitions and to grant any interim relief. The Tribunal upheld the objections raised by the State of Karnataka and the State of Kerala holding that the said applications were not maintainable in law and, accordingly, dismissed the same. Aggrieved by the said orders, special leave petition was filed for seeking leave to assail the said order. This Court passed the judgment in State of Tamil Nadu v. State of Karnataka and Ors. MANU/SC/0643/1991 : 1991 Supp (1) SCC 240 wherein the majority view stated by N.M. Kasliwal, J. is extracted below:
22. The above passage clearly goes to show that the State of Tamil Nadu was claiming for an immediate relief as year after year, the realisation at Mettur was falling fast and thousands of acres in their ayacut in the basin were forced to remain fallow. It was specifically mentioned that the inordinate delay in solving the dispute is taken advantage of by the Government of Karnataka in extending their canal systems and their ayacut in the new projects and every day of delay is adding to the injury caused to their existing irrigation. The Tribunal was thus clearly wrong in holding that the Central Government had not made any reference for granting any interim relief. We are not concerned, whether the Appellants are entitled or not, for any interim relief on merits, but we are clearly of the view that the reliefs prayed by the Appellants in their C.M.P. Nos. 4, 5 and 9 of 1990 clearly come within the purview of the dispute referred by the Central Government Under Section 5 of the Act. The Tribunal has not held that it had no incidental and ancillary powers for granting an interim relief, but it has refused to entertain the C.M.P. Nos. 4, 5 and 9 on the ground that the reliefs prayed in these applications had not been referred by the Central Government. In view of the above circumstances we think it is not necessary for us to decide in this case, the larger question whether a Tribunal constituted under the Interstate Water Disputes Act has any power or not to grant any interim relief. In the present case the Appellants become entitled to succeed on the basis of the finding recorded by us in their favour that the reliefs prayed by them in their C.M.P. Nos. 4, 5 and 9 of 1990 are covered in the reference made by the Central Government. It may also be noted that at the fag end of the arguments it was submitted before us on behalf of the State of Karnataka that they were agreeable to proceed with the CMPs on merits before the Tribunal on the terms that all party States agreed that all questions arising out of or connected with or relevant to the water dispute (set out in the respective pleadings of the respective parties), including all applications for interim directions/reliefs by party States be determined by the Tribunal on merits. However, the above terms were not agreeable to the State of Tamil Nadu as such we have decided the appeals on merits.