MANU/SC/0516/2000
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
W.P. (C) No. 926 of 1988 [With W.P. (C) No. 237 of 1999]
Decided On: 18.08.2000
Appellants:The Consumer Action Group and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent:State of Tamil Nadu and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
B.N. Kirpal, A.P. Misra and Ruma Pal, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: R. Mohan, Senior Adv., Dayan Krishnan, Nikhil Nayyar, B. Sunita Rao, M.A. Krishnamoorthy, V.G. Pragasam, A. Mariarputham, Aruna Mathur, Anurag D. Mathur, A.V. Rangam, Krishnamurthi Swami, S.R. Setia, Sheil Sethi, P.N. Likhyani, Ambrish Kumar, S. Muralidhar, Kailash Vasdev, Janaki Ramachandran, K.K. Mani, Sudarsh Menon, K. Rajendra Chowdhary, Krishna Murthy and R. Ayyam Perumal, Advs
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 - Section 139(c), Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 - Section 52, Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949 - Section 53; Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(f), Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 31(1), Constitution Of India - Article 32
Disposition:
Petition Partly Allowed
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 14
Cases Referred:
Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Trivandrum and Anr. v. K. Kunhambu and Ors. MANU/SC/0507/1979; Premium Granites and Anr. v. State of T.N. and Ors. MANU/SC/0466/1994; A.N. Parasuraman and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu ; Mahe Beach Trading Co. and Ors. v. Union Territory of Pondicherry and Ors. MANU/SC/1136/1996; Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair v. The State of Kerala and Anr. MANU/SC/0042/1960; State of Bombay and Anr. v. F.N. Balsara MANU/SC/0009/1951; Harishankar Bagla and Anr. v. The State of Madhya Pradesh MANU/SC/0063/1954; Sardar Inder Singh v. The State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0016/1957; P.J. Irani v. The State of Madras MANU/SC/0080/1961
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  7

Dissented
  3

Mentioned
  3

Case Note:

Constitution - validity - Section 113 of Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 - whether Government Orders passed by statutory authority under Section 113 sustainable in law - whenever any statute confers any power on any statutory authority it has to be exercised reasonably within sphere of policy of statute - exercise of power must stand test of judicial scrutiny - when wide power is given to any statutory authority including delegate then it is obligatory on part of authority to record its reason while passing Order - even if Section is silent about recording of reason it is obligatory on Government to record reasons while passing Orders - exercise of power by statutory authority without following aforesaid principles is illegal and arbitrary - Government Orders unsustainable and quashed.
JUDGMENT
A.P. Misra, J.
1. The petitioner challenges the constitutional validity of Section 113 of the Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') as it being ultra vires of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India and also the validity of the orders passed under it, granting exemptions by respondent No. 1, viz., the Government. We are drawn to consider an issue, more appropriately expressed in the words of Chinnappa Reddy, J. "...the perennial, nagging problem of delegated legislation and the so-called Henry VIII Clause have again come up for decision...". The petitioner - the Consumer Action Group which is a trust registered under the Indian Trust Act, has raised similar issue before us.
2. The petitioner through this petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India has brought to the notice of this Court, impunity with which the executive power of State of Tamil Nadu is being exercised indiscriminately in granting exemptions to the violators violating every conceivable control, check including approved plan, in violation of the public policy as laid down under the Act and the Development Control Rules (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules'). The submission is, granting of such exemptions is against the public interest, safety, health and the environment. To bring home this indiscriminate exercise of power, reference is made to about sixty-two such orders passed by the Government between the period 1.7.1987 to 29.1.1988 which have been annexed compositely as Annexure II to the petition. Submission is, it is this indiscriminate exercise of power which results in the shortage of water, electricity, choked roads and ecological and environmental imbalances. Mr. Dayan Krishnan, learned Counsel for the petitioner submits, such exercise of power is because there are no guidelines or control under the Act. This is the main plank of attack, for declaring Section 113 as ultra vires as it can do or undo anything under the Act to wipe out any development without any check which amounts to the delegation by the Legislature of its essential legislative power.
3. Mr. R. Mohan, learned senior Counsel for the State has denounced with vehemence these submissions. The power is neither uncanalised nor without any guideline. This power is controlled through the guidelines, which could be gathered from the Preamble, Objects and Reasons, including various provisions of the Act and the Rules. So far challenge to the orders passed under it by the State Government, it is open for the Court to examine the same and in case they are found to have been passed arbitrarily or illegally the Court may quash the same, but such exercise of power would not lend support to a declaration of Section 113 as ultra vires.
4. In order to appreciate the submissions and to adjudicate the issues involved, it is proper to scan through the periphery, scope and object of the aforesaid Act and the Rules. The Preamble of the Act picturises that the Act is for the planning the development of use of rural and urban land in the State of Tamil Nadu and for the purposes connected therewith. Section 2(13) defines 'development' to mean carrying out of all or any of the works contemplated in a regional plan, master plan, detailed development plan or a new town development plan prepared under this Act, which includes the carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, or over or under the land and also includes making of any material change in the use of any building or land. Sub-section 15 of Section 2 defines 'development plan' to mean for the development or redevelopment or improvement of the area within the jurisdiction of a planning authority and includes a regional plan, master plan, detailed development plan and a new town development plan prepared under this Act. This Act consists of XIV Chapters containing 125 Sections. It provides for the creation of the Metropolitan Development Authority for the Metropolitan area. Under Chapter II-A, the Madras Metropolitan Development Authority (MMDA) was formed. The control and development plan of the Madras Metropolitan area is listed with MMDA. Chapter III deals with the planning authorities and its plan, Chapter IV deals with acquisition and disposal of land, Chapter V contains special provisions regarding new town development authority and Chapter VI refers to the control of development and use of land. This Chapter gives clear guidelines to the appropriate authorities under which it has to perform its statutory functions. Sub-section (2) of Section 49 gives guidelines to enable the appropriate planning authority to grant or refuse permission in respect of an application made under Section 49(1) by any person intending to carry out any development on any land or building. Thus, this Section empowers MMDA to revoke or modify any permission already granted. This also provides as to when such an application for modification could be made. This Act also provides for the Constitution of a Tribunal under Chapter IX and provisions under Chapter X for an appeal, revision or review. It is under Chapter XII, the impugned Section 113 is placed. This confers delegation of power on the State Government and delegation of power to the Director under Section 91 and to the appropriate planning authority under Section 91-A. It is true both these later Sections are hedged with restrictions contained therein. It is under this setting, when there is no check, or restrictions in Section 113 its vires is challenged. This contrast between Section 91 and 91-A with Section 113 is submitted, is indicative that the power with the Government is unguided and uncontrolled. In Chapter XIII, Section 122 empowers the Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. Section 123 obligates the Government to place its rules before the Legislature. Section 124 empowers the planning authority with the previous approval of the Government to make regulations prospectively or retrospectively not inconsistent with this Act and the Rules. Significantly Sub-section (3) of Section 124 gives power to the Government to rescind any regulation made under this Section through notification. Similarly, Rule 3 guides and controls the authorities to exercise its powers within the limitations of each such zone. The said Rules further guide the authorities to exercise its power within the limitation as tabulated specifying the requirements relating to floor space index, maximum height, minimum set-back, front set back, side set back, rear set back etc. For commercial zones further restrictions are in relation to the horsepower rating of electric motors and steps to be taken to regulate storage of explosives, to regulate effluents, smoke, gas or other items likely to cause danger or nuisance to public health. These Rules set out norms on which basis specific standards are to be worked out, keeping in mind the public interest, public health and their safety as well development of that area, to cater to the need of its citizens.
5. It is in this background we now proceed to consider the challenge to Section 113. For ready reference, the same is quoted hereunder:
113. Exemptions:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government may, subject to such conditions as they deem fit, by notification, exempt any land or building or class of land or buildings from all or any of the provisions of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder.
It cannot be doubted, mere reading literally its language, the first impression is that power conferred upon the Government displays one to be of the widest amplitude with no in-built check revealed from this Section. The petitioner's case is, such wide powers have led to its exercise unscrupulously without consideration of its effect on the public at large. On the other hand, learned Counsel for the State denying this submits, the power is bridled and controlled through the Preamble, Objects and Reasons and various provisions of the Act and the Rules.
6. Challenging the vires of this Section, Counsel for the petitioner referred to Premium Granites and Anr. v. State of T.N. and Ors. MANU/SC/0466/1994 : [1994]1SCR579 . In this case, Rule of granting exemption from other provisions of the statute of the Tamil Nadu Minerals Concession Rules, 1959 was challenged as being arbitrary and without any guidelines. Same submission was made, as in the present case that this gives wide discretionary power to the authority uncanalised. This decision held:
...In our view, in interpreting the validity of a provision containing relaxation or exemption of another provision of a statute, the purpose of such relaxation and the scope and the effect of the same in the context of the purpose of the statute should be taken into consideration and if it appears that such exemption or relaxation basically and intrinsically does not violate the purpose of the statute, there will be no occasion to hold that such provision of relaxation or exemption is illegal or the same ultra vires other provisions of the statute. The question of exemption or relaxation exhypothesi indicates the existence of some provisions in the statute in respect of which exemption or relaxation is intended for some obvious purpose.