MANU/SC/8172/2006
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 6588 and 8237-8238 of 2003 and Civil Appeal No. 2656 of 2006 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 18327 of 2004)
Decided On: 12.05.2006
Appellants: U.P. State Sugar Corpn. Ltd. and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Sant Raj Singh and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and P.P. Naolekar, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Rakesh Uttamchandra Upadhyay, Adv
For Respondents/Defendant: Dinesh Dwivedi, Sr. Adv., S.A. Syed, Mukesh Verma, Manish Shankar, Ashish Mohan, Vinay Garg, Avtar Singh Rawat, Jatinder Kumar Bhatia and Nandini Gore (NP), Advs.
Subject: Service
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
U. P. Sugar Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1971 - Section 3; U. P. Sugar Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1971 - Section 16
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15, Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 39(d); Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 - Section 2(h)
Cases Referred:
The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Shri Triloki Nath Khosa and Ors. MANU/SC/0401/1973; State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr. v. Pramod Bhartiya and Ors. MANU/SC/0060/1993; Shyam Babu Verma and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0654/1994; Government of W.B. v. Tarun K. Roy MANU/SC/0945/2003; State of Orissa and Ors. v. Balaram Sahu and Ors. MANU/SC/0895/2002; Union of India and Anr. v. International Trading Co. and Anr. MANU/SC/0392/2003; M.P. Rural Agriculture Extension Officers Association v. State of M.P. and Anr. MANU/SC/0546/2004
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.12.2002 of High Court of Uttaranchal at Nainital in C.M.W.P. No. 235(M/S)/2001
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:


Dissented
  6

Mentioned
  1

Case Note:
Constitution of India - Articles 14 and 39 (d) -- U. P. Sugar Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1971 --Sections 3 and 16--Employment--Pay scale -- Whether educational qualification can be considered to be relevant criterion for purpose of payment of wages?--Held, "yes"--Constitutional scheme postulates equal pay for equal work for those who are equally placed in all respects--Possession of higher qualification--Is valid basis of classification of two categories of employees--First respondent did not possess requisite qualification--He claimed higher scale of pay only because B. P. and S.S. had been paid--Case of B. P. stood on different footing and his pay scale protected under Section 16--In case of S.S., Corporation took wrong decision--Said decision not questioned by first respondent before High Court--Assuming that Corporation was wrong--That by itself would not clothe first respondent with any legal right to claim higher scale of pay--Educational qualification made basis for valid classification for payment of salary in particular scale of pay by Wage Board itself--Only because no such qualification prescribed at time of recruitment--Classification on that basis would not be bad in law--Article 14 has positive concept--No body can claim equality in illegality--Impugned judgment of High Court unsustainable--And set aside.
Case Category:
SERVICE MATTERS - PAY SCALES
Industry: Sugar
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. Leave granted in S.L.P.
2. Whether educational qualification can be considered to be a relevant criteria for the purpose of payment of wages is the question involved in these appeals which arise out of a judgment and order dated 11.12.2002 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Uttaranchal at Nainital in C.M.W.P. No. 235(M/S) of 2001 allowing the writ petition filed by the Respondent herein and an order dated 13.5.2003 refusing to review the said order.
3. Doiwala Sugar Company Limited (Company) was having a sugar mill at Maholi. There exists a post of Assistant Laboratory Incharge in all the sugar mills. The post carried certain grades. The wages of the employees in the sugar factory in the State of Uttar Pradesh used to be governed by the terms of awards of the Wage Board appointed by the Government of India from time to time. An award was made by U.P. Sugar Wage Board in the year 1970 prescribing different scales of pay for different categories of employees working in all the Vaccum Pan Sugar Factories in the State of Uttar Pradesh. Educational qualifications were laid down as criteria for classifying the employees in different grades, which are as under:
(a) for the post of Laboratory Incharge Supervisory A1, - Degree in Science with Physics and Chemistry and Mathematics as subjects and Associate Membership of National Sugar Institute, Kanpur or any other equivalent qualification.
(b) for the post of Laboratory Incharge, Supervisory A-II, - Degree in Science with Physics and Chemistry as subjects and at least two years practical experience in the sugar industry.
However, it was prescribed that in the event the laboratory Incharge, i.e., Supervisory Grade A-II were having the educational qualification of less than a Degree, he would be placed in Supervisory B Grade.
4. The Legislature of the State of U.P. enacted the Uttar Pradesh Sugar Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1971 to provide, in the interest of the general public, for the acquisition and transfer of certain sugar undertakings and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. "Appointed Day" in the said Act was defined to be 3rd July, 1971. In terms of Section 3 of the said Act, on the appointed day, every scheduled undertaking shall, by reason thereof, stand and be deemed to have stood transferred to and vest and be deemed to have vested absolutely in the U.P. State Sugar Corporation Limited (for short "the Corporation"). Section 16 of the said Act provided that every person working in any of such sugar mills which stood vested under the said Act shall on and from the date of such acquisition become an employee of the Corporation and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day if the undertaking had not been transferred to and vested in the Corporation and shall continue to do so until his employment in the Corporation is terminated or until his remuneration or other terms and conditions of services or revised or altered by the Corporation under or in pursuance of any law or in accordance with any provision which for the time being governs his service. The provisions of the said Act, however, were implemented in phases
5. On or about 3.2.1984, an order was issued by the Corporation in terms whereof certain categories of employees like Assistant Engineers, Manufacturing Chemists and Laboratory Incharges posted in various units of the Corporation who had been drawing salary in Supervisory Grade A-I and A-II Grade of the Wage Board of the Sugar Industry were placed in the Corporation scale of pay with effect from 1.2.1984. The scale of pay for such Laboratory Incharge was fixed at Rs. 550-1200 for those who had earlier been working on the initial pay scale of Rs. 375-1000 in terms of the recommendations of the Wage Board. However, those who have been working in the pay scale of Rs. 355-755 were put in the scale of Rs. 500-1000. A revision of pay was effected by the Corporation by a notification dated 23.10.1984 in terms whereof those laboratory Incharges who had earlier been put in the pay scale of Rs. 550-1200 were put in the pay scale of Rs. 900-1770 and those who had been placed in the pay scale of Rs. 500- 1000 were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 770-1600. It had, however, been clarified that pay scale of Rs. 900-1770 would be admissible only to those laboratory Incharges who possessed B.Sc. Degree with Post Graduate Diploma of Sugar Technology from National Sugar Institute and all other laboratory Incharges under Supervisory A-I or A-II would be entitled for the Corporation revised pay scale of Rs. 770-1600.
6. Maholi Sugar Mill belonging to the Company vested in the Corporation with effect from 28.10.1984. The First Respondent herein was appointed in the Sugar Mill on 1.3.1981. He was not possessed of the qualification of Degree in Science. His services were taken over in terms of the provisions of the Act with effect from the date of nationalisation of the sugar mill. It is not in dispute that his scale of pay stood protected in terms of Section 16 of the Act. The First Respondent being in Supervisory Grade-B at the time of acquisition of the factory was, thus, not entitled to be placed in the Corporation pay scale. He was, therefore, continued to be paid in the pay scale prescribed by the Sugar Wage Board even after 28.10.1984. One B.P. Srivastava, working in another mill which also vested in the Corporation, had been getting A-II Grade before nationalisation thereof. His pay was protected.
7. With a view to remove certain anomalies allegedly a Selection Committee was constituted by the Corporation on or about 28.3.1985. The Committee for the said purpose called seven candidates for interview. It is stated that the basis for calling the said candidates for interview is not known. Shri Shyam Sunder Shukla was also one of the candidates called for interview. By reason of recommendations made by the said Committee, four employees out of the seven called for interview including Shri Shukla were placed in the revised pay scale of Rs. 770-1600 meant for laboratory incharge in the Corporation. Shri Shukla was placed in the Corporation scale in Bijnore unit of the Corporation. The First Respondent herein thereafter was transferred to a unit of the Corporation at Rohana Kalan. He continued to be placed in the Supervisory B-Grade and had been drawing salary in the prescribed scale of pay therefore. The Third Sugar Wage Board was constituted. It made its recommendations on 31.1.1991. The said recommendations were given retrospective effect and retroactive operation from 29.12.1989. In terms of the said recommendations, category B-Grade was not prescribed. The First Respondent was also placed in Supervisory A- Grade. He was, however, not placed in the Corporation Scale of Pay. He was transferred from the said Rohana Kalan Unit to Maholi Unit again.
8. In the year 1996, he filed a writ petition before the High Court of Allahabad inter alia praying therein for grant of scale of pay which was being paid to Shri B.P. Srivastava and Shri Shukla. The State of Uttaranchal having been created, the said writ petition was transferred to the High Court of Uttaranchal. By reason of the impugned order, the High Court directed the Appellants to pay similar pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 from the date from which Shri B.P. Srivastava and Shri Shyam Sunder Shukla were being paid. Civil Appeal Nos. 6588 and 8237 of 2003 have been filed against the said order. An application for review was filed which was rejected by an order dated 13.5.2003. Civil Appeal No. 8238 and Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 18327 of 2004 have been filed against the said order.
9. The learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the High Court committed a manifest error insofar as it failed to take into consideration that the cases of both Shri B.P. Srivastava and Shri Shyam Sunder Shukla stood absolutely on different footings. It was contended so far as the case of Shri B.P. Srivastava is concerned, he having already been drawing a higher scale of pay, the same was required to be protected in terms of Section 16 of the Act and insofar as the case of the said Shri Shyam Sunder Shukla is concerned, he was placed on a higher scale of pay by a Committee. It was submitted that as the First Respondent was not possessing the requisite qualification, he could not have been placed on a higher scale of pay.
10. Mr. Dinesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the First Respondent, urged that when the First Respondent entered into service, no such qualification was prescribed. The laboratory Incharges performed the same nature of duty and in that view of the matter the educational qualification prescribed for the said post was wholly immaterial. The learned Counsel urged that the Wage Board having made a distinction in the scales of pay based on educational qualification and the same having been withdrawn by the same authority which came into force with effect from 29.12.1989, at least from the said date the First Respondent should have been placed in the Corporation Scale of Pay.
11. Our attention was also drawn to the fact that the Committee purported to have been appointed by the Corporation for reasons best known to it called only seven candidates for interview. The Corporation has not disclosed as to why the case of the First Respondent had not been considered by the said Committee. The case of Shri Shyam Sunder Shukla, thus, could not have been considered by the said Committee and in that view of the matter as he although is not possessed of a Degree, he having been placed in the Corporation Scale of Pay, there was absolutely no reason as to why he should be discriminated. The doctrine of equal pay for equal work, as adumbrated under Article 39(d) of the Constitution of India read with Article 14 thereof, cannot be applied in a vacuum. The constitutional scheme postulates equal pay for equal work for those who are equally placed in all respects. Possession of a higher qualification has all along been treated by this Court to be a valid basis for classification of two categories of employees.
12. In The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Shri Triloki Nath Khosa and Ors. MANU/SC/0401/1973 : (1974)ILLJ121SC , the validity of such a classification came to be considered before this Court. Chandrachud, J., (as the learned Chief Justice then was), opined:
...Formal education may not always produce excellence but a classification founded on variant educational qualifications is, for purposes of promotion to the post of an Executive Engineer, to say the least, not unjust on the face of it and the onus therefore cannot shift from where it originally lay.