MANU/SC/8395/2008
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Criminal Appeal No. 2019 of 2008 (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 1660 of 2005)
Decided On: 12.12.2008
Appellants: U.P. Pollution Control Board
Vs.
Respondent: Bhupendra Kumar Modi and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
K.G. Balakrishnan, C.J. and P. Sathasivam, J.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Suraj Singh, Adv.
For Respondents/Defendant: L.N. Rao, Sr. Adv.
Subject: Criminal
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Relevant Section:
WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974 - Section 44; WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974 - Section 47, WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974 - Section 25, WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) ACT, 1974 - Section 26
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) - Section 482; Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 2, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 24, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 25, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 25(1), Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 25(1)(2), Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 26, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 43, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 44, Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 47
Cases Referred:
Smt. Nagawwa v. Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi and Ors. MANU/SC/0173/1976; State of Karnataka v. Pratap Chand and Ors. MANU/SC/0237/1981; Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi and Ors. MANU/SC/0094/1982; State of Haryana v. Brij Lal Mittal and Ors. MANU/SC/0336/1998; Nalin Thakor and Ors. v. State of Gujarat and Ors. (2003) 12 SCC 461; U.P. Pollution Control Board v. Mohan Meakins Ltd. and Ors. MANU/SC/0199/2000; U.P. Pollution Control Board v Modi Distillery and Ors. (1987) 3 SCC 684
Prior History:
From the final Judgment and Order dated 29.11.2004 of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, Lucknow in Crl. Misc. Case No. 1347 of 2001
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Citing Reference:



Affirmed
  1

Discussed
  5

Distinguished
  1

JUDGMENT
P. Sathasivam, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal is directed against the order dated 29.11.2004 passed in Crl. Misc. Case No. 1347 of 2001 of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench quashing the Complaint Case No. 44 of 1988 filed by the U.P. Pollution Control Board, Lucknow through its officers against M/s Modi Carpets Ltd. Raebareli and 12 others under Section 44 of the Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") pending in the Court of Special Judicial Magistrate (Pollution), Lucknow.
3. Background facts, in a nutshell, are as follows:
The State Board for Prevention and Control of Water Pollution was constituted on 03.02.1975 by the Government of U.P. and it has been named as - U.P. Pollution Control Board (hereinafter referred to as "the Board") which is the appellant herein vide notification No. 2179/9-2-100-74 dated 13.07.1982. On the application submitted by M/s Modi Carpets Ltd., Raebareli, seeking consent to discharge effluent, the appellant-Board granted conditional consent to discharge their trade effluent in the river Sai. Since the conditions of consent were not being complied with by M/s Modi Carpets Ltd., a letter dated 30.4.1983 was sent by the appellant-Board to M/s Modi Carpets Ltd., Raebareli informing that non- compliance of the consent conditions is an offence under Section 44 of the Act. On 07.06.1983, the inspection of unit of M/s Modi Carpets Ltd. was done by the officers of the Board wherein it was found that polluted trade effluent was being discharged into the river Sai through drain without any treatment and construction of effluent treatment plant was yet to be started. On 19.01.1984, the Board again sent a letter to M/s Modi Carpets Ltd. that conditions of the consent order dated 22.1.1983 were not complied with. Again it was reiterated that non-compliance of the conditions of consent would be an offence under Section 44 of the Act. On 13.09.1984, the unit was again inspected by the officers of the Board and it was found that effluent was being discharged without any treatment. For this, Modi Carpets Ltd. sent a reply dated 18.10.1984 to the appellant-Board giving clarifications for not complying with the consent conditions and the same was considered and rejected by the Board on 31.10.1984 on the ground that the unit was not complying with the prescribed standards, consent conditions and also the application was incomplete in various aspects.
4. Since M/s Modi Carpets Ltd. was not complying with the provisions of the Act and there was violation of Sections 25 & 26 of the Act, a complaint under Section 44 was filed by the Board through its Assistant Environmental Engineer against respondent No. 1 as well as other persons namely, Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Managing Director, Joint Managing Director, Directors, General Manager, Commercial Manager and Company Secretary of M/s Modi Carpets Ltd. before the C.J.M., Raebareli. It was specifically mentioned in the complaint that the aforesaid persons are responsible for the conduct of the business of the company and for their monetary benefits continued to discharge noxious and polluting trade effluent of the company without complying with the conditions of consent and mandatory provisions of law. A petition under Section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code was filed before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad being Criminal Misc. Petition No. 14119 of 1985 by M/s Modi Carpets Ltd. & Ors. for quashing the aforesaid complaint and also for other reliefs. Vide order dated 5.11.1985, the High Court stayed further proceedings in the complaint case. On the objection of the Board that the Principal Bench at Allahabad had no territorial jurisdiction to decide the petition, the first respondent herein filed a petition under Section 482 of the Crl.P.C. before Lucknow Bench of the High Court being Crl. Misc. Case No. 1347 of 2001. In the said petition, it was alleged that the first respondent, Dr. Bhupendra Kumar Modi, Joint Managing Director was not concerned with day-to-day business of the company and cannot be prosecuted for the offence committed by the Company, hence, it was prayed that Complaint Case No. 44 of 1988 filed by the appellant-Board be quashed.
5. The appellant-Board filed a counter affidavit before the High Court wherein it was stated that the complaint could not be quashed at the initial stage and whether a person is responsible for conduct of day-to-day business of the Company or not, is a question which has to be decided by evidence. In any event it was stated that the complaint discloses materials to proceed further.
6. By impugned order dated 29.11.2004, the High Court quashed the complaint so far as it related to respondent No. 1 on the main ground that there was no material on record to show that respondent No. 1 was, at the relevant time, incharge and responsible to the company for conduct of its business. Aggrieved by the said judgment of the Lucknow Bench, the appellant-Board has filed the above appeal by way of special leave.
7. Heard Mr. Rakesh K. Khanna, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the appellant-Board and Mr. L.N. Rao, learned senior counsel, appearing for the 1st respondent.
8. The only point for consideration in this appeal is whether the complaint of U.P. Pollution Control Board discloses any material against the first respondent i.e., Dr. Bhupendra Kumar Modi, Joint Managing Director, particularly, his control over the decision making process of the Company and whether the High Court was justified in quashing the same in so far as Dr. Bhupendra Kumar Modi in a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
9. The High Court while accepting the case of Dr. Bhupendra Kumar Modi perused the complaint of the Board. According to it, nowhere it is specifically stated in the complaint and there is also no material on record to show that Dr. Bhupendra Kumar Modi was, at the relevant time, in- charge and responsible to the Company for the conduct of the business. The High Court also concluded that there was no specific allegation that at the relevant time, respondent No. 1 was in-charge of the Company or was looking after the day-to- day affairs of the company or that the offence has been committed with his consent or connivance. By arriving such conclusion the High Court quashed the prosecution in so far as the first respondent herein is concerned. In the same order, the High Court made it clear that the prosecution is free to proceed against other persons mentioned in the complaint.
10. In order to answer the questions raised, we verified the complaint (Annexure - 8) of the Board laid under Section 44 of the Act. Section 25(1) of the Act makes it mandatory for every new industry to obtain consent of the "Board" for bringing into use any new or altered outlet for the discharge of its trade effluent into the stream or well or on land as defined in Section 2 of the Act read with its amending Act [Act No. 44 of 1978]. The Company and all the persons in-charge of the day- to-day affairs are required to abide by the mandatory provisions for operating their industrial establishment. The complaint further shows that the Company had applied for the grant of consent of the Board for the discharge of its trade effluent on 29.09.1982 which was received by the Board on 04.10.1982 and after considering all aspects the conditional consent order No. 83/170 dated 22.01.1983 was issued in favour of the Company. According to the Complainant, the Company had not sent the report for proper compliance of the condition which was imposed. Accordingly, the site of the Company at Raebareli had been inspected by the officers of the Board on 07.06.1983 and on 13.09.1984 in the presence of representatives of the Company. According to the Board, the accused persons intentionally failed to comply with the conditions of consent order dated 22.01.1983 and to construct proper effluent treatment plant and discharging without consent of the Board. This has been asserted in para 15 of the complaint. In para 16, it is stated that the accused persons, namely, 2-13 are Chairman, Managing Director/Joint Managing Director, Directors, Secretaries and Managers of M/s Modi Carpets Ltd., Raebareli, who are responsible for the conduct of the business of the Company and also for not complying the conditions and for not constructing proper plant for the treatment of their highly polluting trade effluent so as to conform to the standard laid down by the Board. In the same paragraph, it is further asserted that the accused persons are deliberately avoiding the provisions of Section 25 of the Act for which they are punishable under Section 44 read with Section 47 of the Act. In para 17 of the complaint, it is specifically stated that at the time of commission of offence all the persons were in-charge of the business of the Company and responsible for the day-to- day working of the Company and also for conducting of the business of the Company and continuous commissioning of offence under Section 44 of the Act and the construction of effluent treatment plant can be taken up only when these senior authorities resolved to do so. It is further stated that the offence mentioned in the complaint is being continuously committed against the society at large, animals and aquatic life in particular because of their personal monetary gains. In para 21, it is specifically stated that the Chairman, Directors and Secretaries are the brain and nerve centre of Modi Carpets and conducting the business of the Company which has been discharging its trade effluents into stream for which they are to be punished under Section 44 read with Section 47 of the Act. In para 22, it is asserted that under the provisions of Section 47 of the Act where an offence has been committed by a Company every person, who at the time of commission of the offence was in-charge of and responsible to the Company for the conduct of the business shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and liable to be proceeded and punished accordingly.
11. Apart from the above specific averments, the Board has also placed a letter dated 22.01.1983 granting conditional consent to respondent No. 1, copy of the inspection reports, various letters/communications and their reply as Annexures P-1 to P-7.
12. Among the various provisions of the Act, we are more concerned about Section 47 which speaks about offences by companies which reads thus:
47. Offences by companies.- (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Section 25 speaks about restrictions on new outlets and new discharges and Section 26 relates to provision regarding existing discharge of sewage or trade effluent. Section 44 speaks about penalty for contravention of Section 25 or Section 26.
13. It is not in dispute that the first respondent before letting out trade effluent into a stream or a river has to satisfy certain conditions in terms of the provisions of the Act and the order of the authorities concerned. It is also not in dispute that without a consent order by the Board the Company cannot let out untreated effluent into a land or stream or river. Though a consent order was issued by the Board it has been specifically stated in the complaint that those conditions have not been fulfilled by the Company. In those circumstances, in the interest of the public health, the appellant-Board through its officers laid a complaint against the persons, who are in charge of the day-to-day affairs and in the decision making process. There is no need to place all the materials at the threshold. However, on perusal of the complaint and the relevant materials in the form of documents, the learned Special Judicial Magistrate (Pollution) entertained the same and issued summons to the named persons in the complaint. Inasmuch as the High Court quashed the complaint against the first respondent herein who is a Joint Managing Director of the Company, we are concerned about the averments/allegations against him in respect of his concern in the day-to-day affairs and in the decision making process. We have already referred to the relevant averments/materials adverted to in the complaint. Before going into the reasoning and conclusion of the High Court for quashing the complaint against the first respondent herein, let us consider various decisions of this Court with reference to the very same provisions, namely, Sections 44 and 47 of the Act as well as the jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 482 of Cr.PC.
14. It is settled legal position that at the stage of issuing process, the Magistrate is mainly concerned with the allegations made in the complaint or the evidence led in support of the same and he is only to be prima facie satisfied whether there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused.