MANU/SC/2872/2007
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 4 of 2005 and Civil Appeal No. 2537 of 2007 (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 11880 of 2006)
Decided On: 15.05.2007
Appellants: Udai Singh Dagar and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
S.B. Sinha and Markandey Katju, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: G.E. Vahanvati, S.G., Mohan Prasaran, ASG, Aruneshwar Gupta and Sonam P. Wangdi, A.Gs., Swarup Singh, Sr. AAG, Avtar Singh Rawat, AAG, R.F. Nariman, Uday Umesh Lalit, Mohd. Yusuph and Shekhar Naphade, Sr. Advs., Amit Sibal, S. Udaya Kumar Sagar, Bina Madhavan, Hemal Kiritkumar Sheth, Advs.(for Lawyer's Knit & Co.), Sanjay Sen, Ashish Jha, Jayant Mohan, Manu Aggarwal, Manik Karanjawala, Devadatt Kamat, Wasim A. Qadri, V.K. Verma, Anil Katiyar, Navin Prakash, Gopal Singh, Rituraj Biswas, Anukul Raj, K.N. Madhusoodhanan, R. Sathish, Naveen Kumar Singh, Mukul Sood, Shashwat Gupta, Shikha Tandon, A. Mariarputham, Aruna Mathur, Advs., (Aruputham Aruna & Co.), Ashok Bhan, D.S. Mahra, S.S. Shinde, V.N. Raghupathy, Tara Chandra Sharma, Neelam Sharma, V.G. Pragasam, S. Vallinayagam, S. Prabhu Ramasubramanian, J.S. Attri, Khwairakpam Nobin Singh, Sapam Biswajit Meitei, D. Rao, Bhavani Shankar V. Gadnis, Sunita B. Rao, Anil Srivastava, Manoj Saxena, Rajnish Kumar Singh, Rahul Shukla, Tripurari Ray, T.V. George, Riku Sharma, Minakshi Sharma, Advs.(for Corporate Law Group Advs.), Suparna Srivastava, Pooja Matlani, Rajesh Srivastava, Jatinder Kumar Bhatia, R.K. Pandey, A.K. Sinha, Ajay Siwach, Manjit Singh, Hrikesh Singh, Vikrant Singh Bais, B.S. Banthia, Sunita Sharma, D.N. Goburdhan, Pinky Anand, Piyush Singhal, Hemantika Wahi, Pinky Behera, B. Sunita Rao, Ranjan Mukherjee, Kamini Jaiswal, Sanjay R. Hegde, R. Hegde, R. Ayyam Perumal, Shreekant N. Terdal, M.T. George, Bimal Roy Jad, Mohanprasad Meharia, Sunita Hazarika, Ravindra Keshavrao Adsure, B.B. Singh and Radha Shyam, Advs.
Subject: Civil
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 19, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(g), Constitution Of India - Article 19(6), Constitution Of India - Article 252, Constitution Of India - Article 311, Constitution Of India - Article 32; General Clauses Act 1897 - Section 19, General Clauses Act 1897 - Section 6, General Clauses Act 1897 - Section 6(1)(c); Indian Evidence Act, 1872 - Section 45; Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 - Section 17, Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 - Section 17(2), Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 - Section 17(3)(b), Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 - Section 25; Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 15, Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 2(e), Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 12, Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 2(f), Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 2(g), Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 22, Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 23, Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 3, Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 30, Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 67
Relevant Section:
Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 2; Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Section 30
Cases Referred:
Akadasi Padhan v. State of Orissa and Ors. MANU/SC/0089/1962; Amritsar and Ors. v. State of Punjab and Ors. MANU/SC/0050/1969; Bansidhar and Ors. v. State of Rajasthan MANU/SC/0057/1989; Bombay Dyeing and Mfg. Co. Ltd. v. Bombay Environmental Action Group and Ors. MANU/SC/1197/2006; Chief Adjudication Officer and Anr. v. Maguire 1999 (2) ALL ER 859; Delhi Pradesh Registered Medical Practitioners v. Director of Health, Delhi Admn. Services and Ors. MANU/SC/1841/1997; Dr. Mukhtiar Chand and Ors. v. State of Punjab and Ors. MANU/SC/0646/1998; Gammon India Ltd. v. Special Chief Secretary and Ors. MANU/SC/8025/2006; India Tobacco Co. Ltd. v. Commercial Tax Officer, Bhavanipore and Ors. MANU/SC/0353/1974; Kay v. Goodwin and Lord Tenterdon; Mohinder Singh v. Harbhajan Kaur; Mount v. Taylor; National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Laxmi Narain Dhut MANU/SC/1233/2007; Orient Paper and Industries Ltd. and Anr. etc. v. State of Orissa and Ors. MANU/SC/0169/1991; Rasbihari Panda and Ors. v. The State of Orissa MANU/SC/0054/1969; Saghir Ahmad v. The State of U.P. and Ors. MANU/SC/0110/1954; State of Madras v. V.G. Row MANU/SC/0013/1952; State of Orissa v. M.A. Tulloch & Co.; State of Punjab v. Mohar Singh MANU/SC/0043/1954; State of Tamil Nadu and Ors. v. L. Abu Kavur Bai and Ors. MANU/SC/0073/1983; Surtees v. Ellison; Thyssen Stahlunion Gmbh v. Steel Authority of India Ltd. MANU/SC/0652/1999; Tinsukhia Electric Supply Co. Ltd. v. State of Assam and Ors. MANU/SC/0027/1990; Utkal Contractors and Joinery (P) Ltd. and Ors. v. State of Orissa MANU/SC/0125/1987; Free Lanka Insurance Co Ltd v Ranasinghe [1964] AC 541
Authorities Referred:
Francis Bennion's Statutory Interpretation; Southerlands Statutory Construction 3rd Edn. Vol. I, para 2014 and 2022, pp. 468 and 490; Craies on Statute Law, 7th Edn. pp. 349, 353, 373, 374 and 375; Maxwell's Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edn. pp. 164, 390
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  2

Dissented
  7

Mentioned
  16

Case Note:
Constitution - Fundamental Rights - Right to Freedom - Violation of - Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution - Section 30 of the Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Respondent issue Notification under Section 30 of the Act specifying minor Veterinary services to be rendered by the Veterinary Science Certificate or Diploma holders in Government services or in semi Government organization curtailing the right of certificate and diploma - Appellants filed a Writ Petition on the grounds that restriction imposed of violative of Article 19(1)(g) - Any restriction should not only reasonable and in public interest - High Court dismissed the petition - Hence present appeal - Whether the Respondent can pass a legislation limiting the right to practice of the Appellant - Held, in the matter of laying down of qualification by a statute, the restriction imposed as envisaged under second part of Clause (6) of Article 19(1)(g)of the Constitution of India must be construed being in consonance with the interest of the general public - The provisions contained in Section 30 of the Central Act constitute a reasonable restriction within the meaning of the first part of Article 19(6) of the Constitution of India and the fundamental rights under Article19(1)(g) thereof - Appeal dismissed

Constitution - Constitutionality of provisions of a Statute - Section 30 of the Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 - Appellants contended that having regard to the provisions of Section 67 of the Central Act, vis-à-vis Section 6 of the General Clauses Act the rights and liabilities accrued prior to coming into force of the Central Act must be held to be saved and therefore their right to practice cannot be curtailed to only specific minor veterinary services - Held, the right of the Appellant to practice in the field of veterinary practice has expressly been taken away - Laying down essential qualification, which the Petitioners admittedly do not possess, the right of the Petitioners to continue to practice would not survive - The expression "unless a different intention appears" contained in Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, would clearly be attracted -A right whether inchoate or accrued or acquired right can be held to be protected provided the right survives - If the right itself does not survive and either expressly or by necessary implication it stands abrogated, the question of applicability of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act would not arise at all - Appeal dismissed
Ratio Decidendi:
"If a restriction to be imposed by a statute is a reasonable one and is in public interest then the same is constitutionally valid."

"A right whether inchoate or accrued or acquired right can held to be protected provided the right survives. If the right itself does not survive and either expressly or by necessary implication it stands abrogated, the question of applicability of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act would not arise at all."
JUDGMENT
S.B. Sinha, J.
1. Leave granted in S.L.P.
2. Constitutionality and/ or applicability of the provisions of Section 30 of the Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 (for short "the Central Act") is in question herein.
3. Before, however, embarking on the questions involved, we may at the outset notice that the Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P.(Civil) No. 11880 of 2006 arises out of a judgment and order dated 26.04.2006 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Civil Writ Petition No. 4619 of 1997 whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by the appellant herein in regard to the applicability of Section 30 of the Central Act was dismissed. In the said writ petition, the following prayers were made:
(a) the declaration that the non-graduate Veterinary Practitioners who are registered under the Maharashtra Veterinary Practitioners Act, 1971 (for short to be referred as "the State Veterinary Act") are eligible to practice Veterinary medicine in the same manner and on such conditions as they were prior to coming into force of the Indian Veterinary Councils Act, 1984 ("Central Veterinary Act" for short) in the State of Maharashtra;
(b) to declare that non-graduate Veterinary Practitioners who are eligible to be registered under the State Veterinary Act will be permitted to practice Veterinary medicine in the same manner and on such conditions as they were prior to the coming into force of the Central Veterinary Act in the State of Maharashtra; and
(c) for directions to renew the registration of non-graduate Veterinary Practitioners in the register maintained by the State Council under the State Veterinary Act til the coming into force of the Central Veterinary Act.
4. The Writ Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioners representing similarly placed veterinary practitioners from several States and Union Territories of India against the Union of India as also the concerned States praying inter alia for the following reliefs:
a) issue an appropriate writ revoking and declaring null and void the impugned Section 30 of the Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 and b) issue an appropriate writ revoking and declaring null and void Rule No. 37/45 of Indian Veterinary Practitioners Regulation, 1992.
*** *** ***
l) issue a writ of mandamus/ any other appropriate writ, order or directions restraining the Respondents from acting/ giving effect to the provisions of Section 30 of the Indian Veterinary Council Act, 1984 and Rule No. 37/45 of Indian Veterinary Practitioners Regulation, 1992 and the above notifications mentioned in prayer Clause (c) to (k) above.
In the writ petition, prayers have also been made for revoking and declaring notifications issued by the respective State Governments in terms of Section 30 of the Central Act as void.
5. We will, however, record the facts of the matter from Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 11880 of 2006.
Appellant is an Association registered under the Trade Unions Act. It purports to represent the Veterinary Practitioners of the State of Maharashtra. The subject of legislation was a State subject. The States of Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan, however, adopted a resolution purported to be in terms of Clause (1) of Article 252 of the Constitution of India requesting the Union of India to make a parliamentary legislation to the effect that the matter may be regulated in those States by Parliamentary Act. Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said resolution, Parliament enacted the Central Act being Act No. 52 of 1984. It came into force with effect from 18th August, 1984. It was enacted with a view to regulate veterinary practice and to provide, for that purpose, for the establishment of a Veterinary Council of India and State Veterinary Councils and the maintenance of registers of the veterinary practitioners and for matters connected therewith.
6. We may hereafter notice some of the provisions of the Central Act.
7. Sections 2(e), 2(f) and 2(g) of the Central Act read as under:
(e) "recognized veterinary qualification" means any of the veterinary qualifications included in the First Schedule or the Second Schedule;
(f) "register" means a register maintained under this Act;
(g) "registered veterinary practitioner" means a person whose name is for the time being duly registered in a register;
8. Section 3 provides for the establishment of the Central Council and the State Councils.
9. Sections 15, 22, 23, 30 and 67 of the Central Act read as under:
15. (1) The veterinary qualifications granted by any veterinary institution in India which are included in the First Schedule shall be recognized veterinary qualifications for the purposes of this Act,
(2) Any veterinary institution in India, which grants a veterinary qualification not included in the First Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification recognized and the Central Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette amend the First Schedule so as to include such qualification therein and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the First Schedule against such veterinary qualification declaring that it shall be a recognized veterinary qualification only when granted after a specified date.
22. Minimum standards of veterinary education.--
(1) The Council may, by regulations, specify the minimum standards of veterinary education required for granting recognized veterinary qualifications by veterinary institutions in those States to which this Act extends.
(2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Council to the State Government concerned and the Council shall, before submitting such regulations or any amendments thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for approval, take into consideration the comments of the State Government received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as aforesaid.
(3) The Central Government may, before approving such regulations or any amendments thereof, consult the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
(4) The Committee constituted under Section 12 shall from lime to time report to the Council on the efficacy of the regulations and may recommend to the Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit.
23. Indian veterinary practitioners register.--
(1) The Council shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, cause to be maintained in such form and in such manner as may be provided by regulations a register of veterinary practitioners to be known as the Indian veterinary practitioners register which shall contain the names of all persons who possess the recognized veterinary qualifications and who are for the time being enrolled on a State veterinary register of the State to which this Act extends.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Council to keep the Indian veterinary practitioners register in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Council, and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India or in such other manner as may be provided by regulations.
(3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.
(4) Each State Veterinary Council shall furnish to the Council six printed copies of the State veterinary register as soon as may be after the 1st day of April of each year and each State Veterinary Council shall inform the Council without delay of all additions, and other amendments in the State veterinary register made from time to time.
30. Right of persons who are enrolled on the Indian veterinary practitioners register.--
No person, other than a registered veterinary practitioner, shall--
(a) hold office as veterinary physician or surgeon or any other like office (by whatever name called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority;
(b) practise veterinary medicine in any State : Provided that the State Government may, by order, permit a person holding a diploma or certificate of veterinary supervisor, stockman or stock assistant (by whatever name called) issued by the Directorate of Animal Husbandry (by whatever name called) of any State or any veterinary institution in India, to render under the supervision and direction of a registered veterinary practitioner, minor veterinary services.
Explanation.-- "Minor veterinary services" means the rendering of preliminary veterinary aid, like, vaccination, castration, and dressing of wounds, and such other types of preliminary aid or the treatment of such ailments as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate a veterinary health certificate or any other certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by duly qualified veterinary practitioner;
(d) be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under Section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, on any matter relating to veterinary medicine.
67. Repeal and saving.--
As from the commencement of this Act in any State, every other Act relating to any matter contained in this Act and in force in that State shall, to the extent to which that Act or any provision contained therein corresponds, or is repugnant, to this Act or any provision contained in this Act, stand repealed and the provisions of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply to such repeal as if such other Act were a Central Act.
10. The State of Bombay enacted Bombay Veterinary Practitioners Act, 1953 (for short "the 1953 Act"). The matter relating to veterinary practice in the then State of Bombay as also the requisition in the service of the State appointments for the purpose of veterinary duties was regulated. The 1953 Act provided for maintenance of the register of the veterinary practitioners. Sections 14, 19, 24 and 25, which are relevant for our purpose, read as under:
14 (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person shall, if he holds any of the qualifications included in the Schedule be entitled on application to be registered, on payment of a fee of Rs. 15 and on giving evidence to the satisfaction of the Registration Officer or the Registrar, as the case may be, of his possession of a qualification entitling him for registration.
(2) The State Government may, after consulting the Registration Officer or the Council, as the case may be, permit the registration of any person who has been actually conducting veterinary practice in the State of Bombay since a date prior to the 1st day of January 1944, notwithstanding the fact that he may not be possessing qualifications entitling him to have his name entered in the register.
(3) Every person for the time being registered with the veterinary Council of any other State in India under any law for the registration of veterinary practitioners in force in such State shall, if reciprocity of registration has been arranged with such Council, be entitled to be registered under this Act, on making an application in that behalf, on payment of a fee of Rs. 15 and on his informing the Registration Officer or the Registrar, as the case may be, of the date of his registration under the said law and on giving a correct description of his qualifications with the dates on which they were granted.
(4) Any person who has been convicted of a cognizable offence as defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or who, being or having been subject to military law has been convicted under the Army Act or under the Indian Army Act, 1911 or under the Army Act, 1950, of an offence which is also a cognizable offence as so defined and any person who after due enquiry has been held guilty by the Council of infamous conduct in any professional respect may be refused registration under this Act.
19. No person shall, except with the sanction of the State Government, hold any appointment for the performance of veterinary duties in any veterinary dispensary, hospital or infirmary which is not supported entirely by voluntary contributions or which belongs to a local authority or in any public establishment, body or institution, unless he is registered under this Act.
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no person other than a person registered under Part IV of this Act -
(a) shall sign or authenticate any veterinary or physical fitness certificate required by any law or rule to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified veterinary practitioner, or
(b) shall be qualified to give evidence as an expert under Section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or any matter relating to veterinary science.
25: No person shall add to his name any title, description, letters or abbreviations which imply that he holds a degree, diploma, licence or certificate as his qualification to practice any system of veterinary science unless -
(a) he actually holds such degree, diploma, licence or certificate; and
(b) such degree, diploma, licence or certificate is specified in the Schedule or his recognized by law for the time being in force in India or in any part thereof or has been conferred, granted or issued by an authority empowered or recognized as competent by the State Government to confer, grant, or issue such degree, diploma, licence or certificate.
11. The State of Bombay was bifurcated into the State of Maharashtra and the State of Gujarat with effect from 1st May, 1960.
12. The State of Maharashtra enacted the Maharashtra Veterinary Practitioners Act, 1971 (for short "the 1971 Act"). The said Act came into force from 15th November, 1971. Section 15 of the 1971 Act mandates the State to cause a register to be prepared for veterinary practitioners of the State and maintained in such form as may be directed. The register is to contain the name, address and qualification of every person registered thereunder together with the date on which such qualification was acquired.
13. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 18 of the 1971 Act read as under:
18 (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person shall, if he holds any of the qualifications included in the Schedule, be entitled on application to be registered, on payment of such fee as may be provided by regulations and on giving evidence to the satisfaction of the Registration Officer or the Registrar as the case may be, of his possession of a qualification entitling him for registration.
(2) The State Government may, after consulting the Registration Officer or the Council, as the case may be, permit the registration of any person who has been actually conducting veterinary practice in the State of Maharashtra on such conditions as may be provided for by regulations made for this purpose, notwithstanding the fact that he may not be possessing qualifications entitling him to have his name entered in the register.
14. Section 23 of the 1971 Act contained an identical provision which is in pari materia with the provisions of the 1953 Act. Section 26 empowers the Council to call for information and attend examination. Section 33 provided for control in the following terms:
33. If it shall appear to the State Government on the report of the Council or otherwise, that the course of study and examinations prescribed by any of the institutions specified in column 1 of the Schedule conferring the qualifications described in column 2 of that Schedule with their abbreviations specified in column 3 thereof are not such as to secure the possession by persons obtaining such qualifications of the requisite knowledge and skill for the efficient practice of their profession, or if it shall appear to the State Government, on the report of the Council or otherwise, that the course of study and examinations prescribed by any institution conferring a qualification not entered in the Schedule are such as to secure the possession by persons obtaining such qualification of the requisite knowledge and skill for the efficient practice of their profession, it shall be lawful for the State Government from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, to direct that the possession of any qualification entered in the Schedule shall not entitle any person to registration under this Act or to direct that the possession of any qualification not entered in the Schedule shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, entitle a person to be so registered as the case may be, and the Schedule shall thereupon be deemed for all purposes be altered accordingly.
15. Section 37 of the 1971 Act provides for a rule making power whereas Section 38 thereof provides for regulation making power. In terms of the provisions of Sections 18, 26 and 33 'recognized veterinary qualifications' were laid down in the schedule appended to the 1971 Act, item No. 20 and 24 whereof read as under:
16. The State of Maharashtra in exercise of its power conferred upon it under Sub-section (1) of Section 38 read with Sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the 1971 Act made regulations known as The Maharashtra Veterinary Practitioners (Conditions for registration of persons actually conducting veterinary practice) Regulations 1981 (for short "the 1981 Regulations"). Regulation 3 reads as under:
3 (I) The conditions on which the registration of any person under Sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Act may be permitted shall be as follows, namely:
(a) the said person shall possess a certificate of completion of practical and theoretical training course:
(i) prescribed by any Government functioning in the Bombay area. Hyderabad area of Vidarbha region before the formation of the State of Maharashtra and who is actually conducting practice in the State of Maharashtra, since then: or
(ii) Prescribed or recognized by the Government of Maharashtra from time to time, after the formation of the State of Maharashtra and who is actually conducting practice in the State of Maharashtra, since then, for eligibility for appointment to a post of Livestock Supervisor, Stockmen, Stockmen-cum-Health Assistant or Veterinary Assistant: or
(b) Shall have at the time of registration, practical experience for a period of not less than ten years in compounding and dispensing under any registered veterinary practitioners possessing a degree in veterinary science of a statutory University.
17. Similar legislations were existing in many other States.
18. Although the Central Act came into force in 1984, several States did not adopt the same. On or from 1997, the Central Act was made applicable to the States of Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan and all Union Territories.
19. The State of Maharashtra issued a notification dated 26th August, 1997 in terms of Section 30 of the Central Act specifying minor veterinary services to be rendered by the Veterinary Science Certificate or Diploma holders in the Government Service or in Semi-Government organizations.
20. The contention of the writ petitions inter alia is that having regard to the fact that the veterinary practitioners who were possessing 'diploma in veterinary science' or 'certificate in veterinary science' which were recognized by the State of Maharashtra and some other States they could not have been divested of their right to practice by reason of the Central Act on the premise that they having the requisite qualification had a fundamental right in terms of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution to carry on veterinary practice or continue to be in the service of the State and any restriction placed on such rights should not only be a reasonable one but also in public interest. The Central Act, insofar as it purports to take away such right to practice or to be continued in service, thus, imposes an unreasonable restriction interfering with their fundamental right inasmuch as the degree holders alone cannot serve the rural areas. Our attention in this behalf has also been drawn to the letters addressed by some Members of the Parliament to the concerned Ministries stating that in the event the services of the petitioners are dispensed with, the same would not be in public interest.
21. The second leaf of argument both in the writ petition as also in the civil appeal arising out of the SLP is that having regard to the provisions of Section 67 of the Central Act, the provisions of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act having been made applicable, the rights and liabilities accrued prior to coming into force of the Central Act must be held to be saved.
22. The contention of the Union of India and the respective State Governments, on the other hand, is that keeping in view the number of veterinary colleges which have been opened in the states, the services of a large number of degree holders can be utilized therefore and in fact thousands of such degree holders are still unemployed. In any event, the State can, for maintaining better standard in profession, lay down qualification which need not satisfy the test of public importance particularly in view of the fact that the Parliament or the States by making suitable enactments can always lay down the qualifications for carrying on any profession.
23. Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, it was urged, would have no application in a situation of this nature inasmuch as the very fact that the Central Act intended to bring about a new situation, the same would ipso facto be a pointer to the fact that both the Central Act and the State Act cannot stand together.
24. The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court, by reason of the impugned judgment, has upheld the contention of the respondents herein. It, however, opined that relief (c) prayed for by the writ petitioners before it, in view of the notification issued on 1st August, 1997 in terms whereof the Central Act had been introduced in the State of Maharashtra with effect from the first day of August, 1997, did not survive. It furthermore held that in view of the provisions of Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the Central Act as existing veterinary practitioners whose names appeared in the register part I maintained by the State Veterinary Council are duly protected, relief (a) as reproduced hereinbefore would be covered thereby.
25. Before us Mr. R.F. Nariman, learned senior counsel advanced arguments on behalf of the appellants in Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 11880 of 2006 whereas Mr. U.U. Lalit, learned senior counsel appeared on behalf of the writ petitioners in the writ petition.
26. The submission of the learned Counsel is that Section 67 of the Central Act must be read in two parts. By reason of the first part, it is conceded that the State Act stands repealed, but it is contended that once the first part of Section 67 comes into force, by reason of the second part, Section 6 of the General Clauses Act is given effect to. In terms of Clauses (b) and (c) of Section 6 of the General Clauses Act, not only the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder but also any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed would stand protected. In that view of the matter, those diploma holders who were on the register maintained by the State are entitled to continue to practice. Our attention in this behalf has also been drawn to the fact that prior to 11th August, 1993, the Maharashtra Veterinary Council is said to have imposed a condition de'hors the 1971 Act refusing to register certificate holders unless they were appointed in government or semi-government institutions and the validity thereof was pending consideration in writ petition No. 3377 of 1993 before the Bombay High Court and as only by a judgment dated 15.01.2003, the impugned condition has been set aside as a result whereof 25,000 certificate holders who could not get themselves also became entitled to the reliefs therefore.
27. The submission of the learned Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the Union of India, the Additional Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the Veterinary Council of India and Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the State of Maharashtra, on the other hand, is that Section 6 of the General Clauses Act would be attracted only when no different intention appears in the new Act. It was pointed out that there exists a distinction between a simple repeal and repeal of an Act substituted by another. If the new Act provides for something which is wholly different from the purview of the repealed act, evidently, a different intention would appear.
28. Article 19 of the Constitution of India provides for protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc. Sub-clause (g) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India confers a fundamental right to protect any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. Clause (6) of Article 19 reads as under:
19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.
(1) ****
(2) ****
(3) ****
(4) ****
(5) ****
(6) Nothing in Sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, and, in particular, nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any law relating to, -
(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business, or
(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.
29. The above provision is in two parts. It empowers Parliament and the State Legislature to impose reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the Sub-clause (g) of Clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India in the interest of the general public. The second part of the said provision provides that in particular nothing therein shall affect the operation of an existing law insofar as it relates to or prevents the State from making any law inter alia relating to the profession or technical qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business. By reason of a statute - law, therefore, undoubtedly, qualifications can be laid down inter alia for practising any profession or carry on any occupation.
30. Such qualifications had been laid down by the State Act. If by reason of the Central Act, a higher qualification has been laid down, the same, in our opinion, would prima facie be presumed to have been enacted in the interest of the general public.
31. We may notice that several States did not make any legislation covering the field like the State of Maharashtra. Some States, however, did.
32. Any profession which deals with the life of a human being or an animal may be regulated or controlled. Essential qualifications can be laid down for the purpose of entry in the State services. In the State of Maharashtra, rendition of veterinary service was primarily the responsibility of the Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samities, as specified in Section 100(1)(a) of the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samities Act, 1961.
100. (1) (a) It shall be the duty of a Zilla Parishad so far as the district fund at its disposal will allow, to make reasonable provision within the District with respect to all or any of the subjects enumerated in the First Schedule as amended from time to time under Sub-section (2) (in this Act referred to as "the District List") and to execute or maintain works or development schemes in the District relating to any such subjects.
33. Item No. 14 of the First Schedule and Item Nos. 9 and 10 of the Second Schedule appended to the said Act read as under:
First Schedule
14. Veterinary aid (excluding District Veterinary Hospitals but including veterinary dispensaries, veterinary aid centers and village veterinary chests).
Second Schedule
(9) Village Veterinary Chests.
(10) Veterinary Aid centers.
34. It is somewhat interesting to note that even in terms of the 1953 Act, there was no provision for allowing a diploma holder to practice.
35. The validity of a statute would ordinarily be tested keeping in view the social conditions as were existing on the date of coming into force thereof. It is one thing to say that a law causes hardship to a section of the people but it is another thing to say that the same would be unconstitutional. It may be that with the passage of time, a statute which was intra vires on the date of coming into force of the Act may be considered to be ultra vires. However, for that there should be sufficient materials which are either brought on record or of which the court can take judicial notice. The difficulty would arise where the materials brought on record may provide for divergent views. In such a situation, the court will not ordinarily exercise its power of judicial review over legislation. The facts on the basis whereof the Legislature of a State or the Parliament had chosen to rely upon should be the guiding factor. The Legislature of Executive can have several choices or options to deal with a matter, and courts cannot say which choice or option should have been preferred.
36. Before us, the Union of India as also the various States including the State of Maharashtra, have placed certain facts. According to the State Governments, despite coming into force of the Central Act they had not opted therefore, immediately as they had to make a detailed study of the applicability thereof in the fact situation obtaining in that particular State. We may by way of example consider the material placed before us by the State of Maharashtra, from a perusal whereof it appears that it is true that when qualified graduate veterinary doctors were not available in sufficient numbers, service of unqualified/diploma holders were utilized. But today we are living in a changed scenario. About 260 post graduates are produced every year and about 2000 qualified graduates are found to be without the job. It has been pointed out that prior to 1970 only 1 Veterinary Graduate was working in each Community Development Block and around 10-15 veterinary Graduates in each district, whereas this situation has changed drastically in 2005.
37. An attempt has been made in the counter-affidavit to demonstrate that due to availability of qualified graduates, duties and responsibilities of diploma holders were curtailed and shifted towards the degree holders. Considering the worldwide trend having regard to international conventions and covenants, the plea of the petitioners to continue old practices, cannot be sustained.
38. Similar is the position in the State of Rajasthan as from its counter affidavit, it would appear that the number of veterinary doctors are sufficient to provide for the veterinary services in the State and many degree holders are still unemployed.
39. We, therefore, are of the opinion that even in the matter of laying down of qualification by a statute, the restriction imposed as envisaged under second part of Clause (6) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India must be construed being in consonance with the interest of the general public. The tests laid down, in our opinion, stand satisfied. We may, however, notice that Clause (6) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India stands on a higher footing vis-à-vis Clause (5) thereof.