MANU/SC/0683/2022
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 1390/2022, 1394/2022, 1417/2022, 1419/2022, 1445/2022, 1414/2022, 1402/2022, 1412/2022, 1411/2022, 1413/2022, 1415/2022, 1418/2022, 1420/2022, 1446/2022, 1447/2022, 1409/2022, 1416/2022, 1395/2022, 1407/2022, 1406/2022, 1398/2022, 1401/2022, 1391/2022, 1403/2022, 1393/2022, 1410/2022, 1405/2022, 1397/2022, 1404/2022, 1400/2022, 1396/2022, 1408/2022, 1399/2022 and 1392/2022
Decided On: 19.05.2022
Appellants: Union of India and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Mohit Minerals Pvt. Ltd.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, Surya Kant and Vikram Nath, JJ.
Subject: Goods and Services Tax
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Disposition:
In Favour of Assessee
Industry: Mines and Minerals
Relevant Section:
INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 - Section 5; INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 - Section 11; INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 - Section 12; INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 - Section 13; INTEGRATED GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017 - Section 15; RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005 - Section 20
Referred Notifications:
MANU/DSTX/0065/2012, MANU/DSTX/0001/2017, MANU/GSIT/0006/2017, MANU/EXCT/0017/2017, MANU/GSIT/0014/2017, MANU/IGCR/0001/2018
Cases Referred:
Mathuram Agrawal vs. State of Madhya Pradesh MANU/SC/0692/1999; Govind Saran Ganga Saran vs. Commissioner of Sales Tax and Ors. MANU/SC/0317/1985; McDowell and Co. Ltd. vs. Commercial Tax Officer MANU/SC/0154/1985; Electronics Corporation of India Limited vs. Commissioner of Income Tax and Ors. MANU/SC/0331/1989; GVK Inds. Ltd. and Ors. vs. The Income Tax Officer and Ors. MANU/SC/0163/2011; Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs. Birla Cotton, Spinning and Weaving Mills, Delhi and Ors. MANU/SC/0175/1968; Union of India (UOI) and Ors. vs. VKC Footsteps India Pvt. Ltd. MANU/SC/0629/2021; Laghu Udyog Bharati and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0444/1999; Union of India (UOI) and Ors. vs. Jalyan Udyog and Ors. MANU/SC/0025/1994; Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/1091/2006; Ispat Industries Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai MANU/SC/4125/2006; Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. and Ors. vs. State of Bihar and Ors. MANU/SC/0392/1983; M.P.V. Sundararamier and Co. vs. The State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0151/1958; Union of India (UOI) and Ors. vs. Hind Energy and Coal Benefication (India) Ltd. MANU/SC/1118/2018; K.P. Varghese vs. Income Tax Officer, Ernakulam and Ors. MANU/SC/0300/1981; Kalpana Mehta and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0421/2017; S.R. Bommai and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0444/1994; Government of NCT of Delhi vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0680/2018; Manohar vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors. MANU/SC/1140/2012; Naraindas Indurkhya vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0066/1974; Commissioner of Income Tax, Bangalore vs. B.C. Srinivasa Setty MANU/SC/0285/1981; Union of India (UOI) and Ors. vs. Tulsiram Patel and Ors. MANU/SC/0373/1985; The Divisional Personnel Officer, Southern Railway and Ors. vs. T.R. Chellappan and Ors. MANU/SC/0488/1975; Ram Manohar Lohia vs. State of Bihar and Ors. MANU/SC/0054/1965; Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad vs. Ben Hiraben Manilal MANU/SC/0297/1983; Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association of India and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0180/1989; Governor-General in Council vs. Province of Madras MANU/PR/0006/1945; Abhiram Singh and Ors. vs. C.D. Commachen (Dead) by L.Rs. and Ors. MANU/SC/0010/2017; Union of India (UOI) and Ors. vs. Pradip Kumar Dey MANU/SC/0675/2000; Kesoram Industries and Cotton Mills Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Wealth Tax, (Central) Calcutta MANU/SC/0142/1965; Som Mittal vs. Govt. of Karnataka MANU/SC/0707/2008; State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. vs. T. Gopalakrishnan Murthi and Ors. MANU/SC/0474/1975; Avinder Singh and Ors. vs. State of Punjab and Ors. MANU/SC/0299/1978; In Re: The Delhi Laws Act, 1912 MANU/SC/0010/1951; The Edward Mills Co. Ltd., Beawar and Ors. vs. The State of Ajmer and Ors. MANU/SC/0106/1954; A.N. Parasuraman and Ors. vs. State of Tamil Nadu MANU/SC/0007/1990
Goods and Services:
Imported goods
Nature of Issue Involved:
Import of Goods; Applicability of GST
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  28

Distinguished
  1

Mentioned
  6

Case Note:
Goods and Service Tax - Constitutionality of Notifications - Notification Nos. 08/2017 and 10/2017, dated 28th June 2017 - Levy of Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) - Component of ocean freight paid by foreign seller to a foreign shipping line - Reverse charge basis - Subject Notifications allegedly created an element of double taxation - Respondent filed writ petition challenging Notification Numbers 8/2017 and 10/2017 on the grounds of they being ultra vires - Division Bench held subject notifications unconstitutional - Hence the present appeal - Whether an Indian importer can be subject to the levy of Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) on the component of ocean freight paid by foreign seller to a foreign shipping line on a reverse charge basis?

Facts:

High Court vide impugned judgment allowed writ petition instituted by Respondents challenging the constitutionality of two notifications of the Central Government. The bone of contention was whether an Indian importer can be subject to the levy of IGST on the component of ocean freight paid by the foreign seller to a foreign shipping line, on a reverse charge basis.The Respondents import non-coking coal by ocean transport on a 'Cost-Insurance-Freight' basis which is supplied to domestic industries. The goods are transported from a place outside India, up-to the customs station in India. The Respondent pays customs duties, which includes value of ocean freight. In the case of a CIF contract, the freight invoice is issued by the foreign shipping line to the foreign exporter, without the involvement of importer. Ocean freight is paid by the importer only when goods are imported under a 'Free-on-Board' contract. In the case of a high seas sale transaction, the coal is purchased from the original buyer before it arrives at Indian ports.Prior to the enforcement of the Goods and Services Tax regime, service tax on ocean freight was exempted. On 28 June 2017, the Central Government issued Notification 10/2017 which categorized the recipient of services of supply of goods by a person in a non-taxable territory by a vessel to include an importer under Section 2(26) of the Customs Act 1962.The Respondent alleged that the impugned notifications created an element of double taxation, as ocean freight is included in the value of goods for the purpose of customs duty which the importer is liable to pay. The Respondent does not dispute the liability of integrated tax on supply of service of transportation when it imports goods on an FOB basis.The Respondent filed a writ petition before the Gujarat High Court challenging Notification Numbers 8/2017 and 10/2017 on the grounds of they being ultra vires the IGST Act and CGST Act besides other. The Division Bench of the High Court held the subject notifications unconstitutional. Hence the present appeal.

Held, while dismissing the Appeal:

The IGST Act enables the Central Government to impose IGST on inter-state supply of goods and services. In aiding the levy and collection of IGST, the IGST Act provides for a comprehensive scheme for determining the nature of supply, time of supply and place of supply.[61]

By Entry 9(ii) of Notification 8/2017, an integrated tax of 5 per cent was levied on supply of specified services, including transportation of goods in a vessel from a place outside India up to the customs station of clearance in India.[65]

Entry 10 of Notification 10/2017 deems an importer of goods as the 'recipient of service' of transportation of goods by a foreign shipping line.[66]

Section 5(3) of the IGST Act provides the Government the power to specify categories of supply of goods or services or both on which tax shall be paid on a reverse charge basis by the recipient. The Government is to exercise this power on the recommendation of the GST Council. The Government in exercise of its power Under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act issued the impugned Notificationspecifying the 'categories of the supply' which shall be subject to reverse charge. The notification, besides specifying the criteria, has also mentioned the corresponding recipient in those categories. The IGST Act and the CGST Act define reverse charge and prescribe the entity that is to be taxed for these purposes. Therefore, the stipulation of the recipient in each of the categories is only clarificatory. The Government by notification did not specify a taxable entity different from that which is prescribed in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act for the purposes of reverse charge.[86]

The impugned levy on the supply of transportation service by the shipping line to the foreign exporter to import goods into India has a two-fold connection: first, the destination of the goods is India and thus, a clear territorial nexus is established with the event occurring outside the territory; and second, the services are rendered for the benefit of the Indian importer. Thus, the transaction does have a nexus with the territory of India.[108]

The impugned notifications were issued after the GST Council took note of the fact that since transport of imported goods by Indian shipping lines to India is not treated as export of service, the Indian shipping lines pay IGST on the same on a forward charge basis. On the other hand, on the same transportation service, the foreign shipping lines are not required to pay tax as they are not taxable persons in India. Therefore, to provide a level playing field to Indian shipping lines, the importer in India has been made liable to pay IGST on transportation of goods by foreign shipping lines on a reverse charge basis. If Indian shipping lines continue to be taxed and not their competitors, namely, the foreign shipping lines, the margins arising out of taxation from GST would not create a level playing field and drive the Indian shipping lines out of business.[130]

(i) The recommendations of the GST Council are not binding on the Union and States for the following reasons:(a) The deletion of Article 279B and the inclusion of Article 279(1) by the Constitution Amendment Act 2016 indicates that the Parliament intended for the recommendations of the GST Council to only have a persuasive value, particularly when interpreted along with the objective of the GST regime to foster cooperative federalism and harmony between the constituent units;(b) Neither does Article 279A begin with a non-obstante Clause nor does Article 246A state that it is subject to the provisions of Article 279A. The 'recommendations' of the GST Council are the product of a collaborative dialogue involving the Union and States. They are recommendatory in nature. To regard them as binding edicts would disrupt fiscal federalism, where both the Union and the States are conferred equal power to legislate on GST; and(c) The Government while exercising its rule-making power under the provisions of the CGST Act and IGST Act is bound by the recommendations of the GST Council. However, that does not mean that all the recommendations of the GST Council made by virtue of the power Article 279A (4) are binding on the legislature's power to enact primary legislations;(ii) On a conjoint reading of Sections 2(11) and 13(9) of the IGST Act, read with Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, the import of goods by a CIF contract constitutes an "inter-state" supply which can be subject to IGST where the importer of such goods would be the recipient of shipping service;(iii) The IGST Act and the CGST Act define reverse charge and prescribe the entity that is to be taxed for these purposes. The specification of the recipient-in this case the importer-by Notification 10/2017 :MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 is only clarificatory. The Government by notification did not specify a taxable person different from the recipient prescribed in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act for the purposes of reverse charge;(iv) Section 5(4) of the IGST Act enables the Central Government to specify a class of registered persons as the recipients, thereby conferring the power of creating a deeming fiction on the delegated legislation;(v) The impugned levy imposed on the 'service' aspect of the transaction is in violation of the principle of 'composite supply' enshrined Under Section 2(30) read with Section 8 of the CGST Act. Since the Indian importer is liable to pay IGST on the 'composite supply', comprising of supply of goods and supply of services of transportation, insurance, etc. in a CIF contract, a separate levy on the Indian importer for the 'supply of services' by the shipping line would be in violation of Section 8 of the CGST Act.[148]

Appeals dismissed.[149]
JUDGMENT
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
A. Introduction
B. Submissions
  B.1 Union of India
B.2 Respondent-assessees
C. Constitutional Architecture of GST
  C. 1 Legislative History of the Constitution Amendment Act 2016
C.2 The nature of the recommendations of the GST Council
D. Analysis
  D.1 Statutory Provisions and Scheme of the IGST Act
D.2 Do the impugned notifications suffer from excessive delegation?
D.3 Charging Section: taxable person, taxable rate and manner of determining value
D.4 Taxable event: Is an ocean freight transaction for import of goods a valid category of supply of services under Section 5(3) of IGST Act?
  D.4.(a) Do imported goods procured on a CIF basis constitute an inter-state supply or is it an extra-territorial tax?
D.4.(b) Are importers service recipients under CIF contracts?
  D.5 Applicability of Section 5(4) of IGST Act.
D.6 Composite Supply and Issues of Double Taxation
E. Conclusion
A. Introduction
1. The Union of India1 is in appeal against a judgment of a Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court dated 23 January 2020. The High Court allowed a petition instituted by the Respondents Under Article 226 for challenging the constitutionality of two notifications of the Central Government. The bone of contention is whether an Indian importer can be subject to the levy of Integrated Goods and Services Tax2 on the component of ocean freight paid by the foreign seller to a foreign shipping line, on a reverse charge basis.
2. The Respondents import non-coking coal from Indonesia, South Africa and the U.S. by ocean transport on a 'Cost-Insurance-Freight'3 basis which is supplied to domestic industries. The goods are transported from a place outside India, up-to the customs station in India. The Respondent pays customs duties on the import of coal, which includes the value of ocean freight. In the case of a CIF contract, the freight invoice is issued by the foreign shipping line to the foreign exporter, without the involvement of the importer. Ocean freight is paid by the importer only when goods are imported under a 'Free-on-Board'4 contract. In the case of a high seas sale transaction, the coal is purchased from the original buyer before it arrives at Indian ports.
3. Prior to the enforcement of the Goods and Services Tax5 regime, service tax on ocean freight was exempted by Notification No. 25/2012-ST (Serial No. 34) : MANU/DSTX/0065/2012 dated 20 June 2012. This exemption was withdrawn by Notification No. 01/2017-ST : MANU/DSTX/0001/2017 dated 12 January 2017 which levied service tax on the importer, by a reverse charge mechanism. With the advent of the GST regime, Notification No. 8/2017-Integrated Tax (Rate) : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 dated 28 June 20176 was issued by the Central Government on the advice of the Goods and Services Tax Council7, in exercise of powers Under Section 5(1), Section 6(1) and Section 20(iii)-(iv) of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act 20178, read with Section 15(5) and Section 16(1) of the Central Goods and Services Act9. Entry 9 of Notification 8/2017 : MANU/EXCT/0017/2017, effective from 1 July 2017, levied an integrated tax at the rate of 5 per cent on the supply of specified services, including transportation of goods, in a vessel from a place outside India up to the customs station of clearance in India.
4. On 28 June 2017, the Central Government issued Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/201710. Serial 10 of Notification 10/2017 categorized the recipient of services of supply of goods by a person in a non-taxable territory by a vessel to include an importer Under Section 2(26) of the Customs Act 1962.
5. Section 5(1) of the IGST Act authorises the levy of an integrated tax on all inter-state supplies of goods and services or both. The integrated tax can also belevied on goods imported into India on the value determined Under Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act 197511 at the point when customs duties are levied on the goods Under Section 12 of the Customs Act 196212. Section 11 of the IGST Act stipulates that the place of supply of goods in the case of goods imported into India shall be the place of the importer. Section 13(9) of the IGST Act contemplates that the place of supply of services, in the case of transportation of goods shall be the destination of the goods. The Respondent alleges that the impugned notifications create an element of double taxation, as ocean freight is included in the value of goods for the purpose of customs duty which the importer is liable to pay. The Respondent does not dispute the liability of integrated tax on supply of service of transportation when it imports goods on an FOB basis.
6. The Respondent filed a writ petition before the Gujarat High Court challenging Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 and Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/201713 on the grounds that: (i) the notifications are ultra vires the IGST Act and CGST Act; (ii) customs duty is levied on the component of ocean freight and the levy of IGST on the freight element in the course of transportation would amount to double taxation; (iii) though in the case of high sea sales, the importer is a different entity yet this regime would tax the Respondent as the importer and the recipient of service; (iv) in the case of a CIF contract, the supply of service of transport of goods in a vessel is by a foreign shipping line located in a non-taxable territory to an exporter located in a non-taxable territory by a vessel outside the territory of India which cannot be subject to tax under the IGST Act; (v) Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 transgresses the provisions of Section 5(3) of the IGST Act as instead of the "recipient" mentioned therein, the "importer" as defined in Section 2(26) of the Customs Act, is made liable to pay tax; and (vi) Entry 9(ii) and para 2 of Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017, read with Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017, creates a deeming fiction and a separate taxable event which is not permissible in law.
7. The Union of India urged before the High Court that although tax is being paid twice on the value of ocean freight, it is not unconstitutional as the tax is on two different aspects of the transaction, namely, the supply of service and import of goods. The rationale for the impugned notifications, according to the Union Government, is to remove the disparity between Indian and foreign shipping lines, as the former are unable to claim input tax credit14 that forms a part of their transportation costs, since supply of goods was hitherto exempt from service tax. The levy of the integrated tax does not, according to the Union of India, impose an additional cost on importers as the cost paid on inward transportation of goods and import freight services is available to them as ITC.
8. Under the existing GST regime (presently under challenge), taxability of ocean freight under different situations is tabulated below:
Service Availed
Shipping Company
Legal Provision
Implication
Import
Indian
Section 12(8) of the IGST Act-the place of supply of services shall be the location of the recipient
Transaction is liable for tax. Importer can claim the amount paid as tax as input tax credit
Export
Indian
Section 12(8) of the IGST Act-the place of supply of services shall be the location of the recipient.
Transaction is liable for tax. The exporter can get refund of input tax credit used for export.
Import
Foreign
Section 13(9) of the IGST Act-the place of supply of services of transportation of goods shall be place of destination of such goods.
Transaction is liable for tax as the place of supply is India. Tax will be paid under reverse charge and can be claimed as input tax credit.
Export
Foreign
Section 13(9) of the IGST Act-the place of supply of services of transportation of goods shall be place of destination of such goods.
Since the place of supply will be outside India, the transaction is not liable for tax.
9. The Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court held that the impugned notifications are unconstitutional for exceeding the powers conferred by the IGST Act and the CGST Act. The High Court held:
(i) The importer of goods on a CIF basis is not the recipient of the transport services as Section 2(93) of the CGST Act defines a recipient of services to mean someone who pays consideration for the service, which is the foreign exporter in this case;
(ii) Section 5(3) of the IGST Act enables the Government to stipulate categories of supply, not specify a third-party as a recipient of such supply;
(iii) There is no territorial nexus for taxation since the supply of service of transportation of goods is by a person in a non-taxable territory to another person in a non-taxable territory from a place outside India up to the Indian customs clearance station and this is neither an inter-state nor an intra-state supply;
(iv) Section 2(11) of the IGST Act defines "import of service" to mean the supply of service where the supplier of service is located outside India, the recipient of service is located in India and the place of supply of service is in India;
(v) In this case, since the goods are transported on a CIF basis, the recipient of service is the foreign exporter who is outside India;
(vi) Section 7(5)(c) of the IGST Act dealing with intra-state supply cannot be read so extensively that it conflates the "supply of goods or services or both in the taxable territory" to "place of supply";
(vii) Sections 12 and 13 of the IGST Act deal with determining the place of supply. Neither of them will apply if both the supplier and recipient of service are based outside India. The mere fact that the service terminates at India does not make the service of supply of transportation to be taking place in India;
(viii) The provisions regarding time of supply, as contemplated in Section 20 of the IGST Act and applicable to Section 13 of the IGST Act dealing with supply of services, are applicable only vis-à-vis the actual recipient of the supply of service, which is the foreign exporter in this case;
(ix) Section 15(1) of the CGST Act enables the determination of the value of the supply, only between the actual supplier and actual recipient of the service;
(x) Since the importer is not the "recipient" of the service Under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, it will not be in a position to avail ITC Under Section 16(1) of the CGST Act; and
(xi) Since the importer pays customs duties on the goods which include the value of ocean freight, the impugned notifications impose double taxation through a delegated legislation, which is impermissible.
B. Submissions
B.1 Union of India
10. Mr. N Venkataraman, learned Additional Solicitor General15 appearing on behalf of the Appellant-the Union of India-urged the following submissions:
A. Constitutional Architecture of IGST
(i) Under Article 286(2), Parliament is empowered to formulate inter alia the principles for determining when a supply of goods or services takes place in any of the ways mentioned in Article 286(1), which includes imports;
(ii) Article 269A enables the Union Government to levy GST on inter-state supplies. The explanation to Article 269A(1) creates a deeming fiction that a supply of goods or services in the course of imports is to be considered as a supply of goods or services or both in the course of interstate trade;
(iii) Article 269A(5) enables Parliament to formulate the principles for determining the place of supply and when a supply of goods and services or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. This constitutional mandate finds legislative effect in the IGST Act;
(iv) As contemplated in Article 286(2) read with Article 269A(1), the IGST Act enacts provisions relating to the levy and collection of integrated tax (Section 5(1)), export of goods [Section 2(5)], export of services [Section 2(6)], import of goods [Section 2(10)], import of services [Section 2(11)], location of recipient of services [Section 2(14)] and location of supplier of services [Section 2(15)];
(v) In terms of Article 269A(5), the IGST Act contemplates provisions for determining the nature of inter-State supply (Section 7), supplies in territorial waters (Section 9), place of supply of goods imported into or exported out of India (Section 11), place of supply of services where the location of supplier and recipient is in India (Section 12) and place of supply of services where the location of supplier and recipient is outside India (Section 13).
B. Charging Section
(vi) The charge created by Section 5(1) of the IGST Act can extend to an ocean freight transaction to be taxed in the hands of the importer. This creation of a charge is in compliance with the essential components of taxation identified by a Constitution Bench in Mathuram Agrawal v. State of Madhya Pradesh MANU/SC/0692/1999 : 1999 (8) SCC 667 ("Mathuram Agrawal") and further elaborated on by this Court in Gobind Saran Ganga Saran v. Commissioner of Sales Tax MANU/SC/0317/1985 : AIR 1985 SC 1041 ("Gobind Saran Ganga Saran").
(vii) The four fundamental principles of a taxing enactment are: the taxable event, the person on whom the levy is imposed, the rate at which the levy is imposed and the measure or the value to which the rate will be applied;
(viii) Section 5(1) fulfils the above components of taxation:
• Taxable event - "There shall be levied a tax called integrated goods and services tax on all inter-State supplies of goods or services or both except on the supply of alcoholic liquor for human consumption."
• Taxable value - "On the value determined Under Section 15 of the CGST Act"
• Taxable rate - "At such rates not exceeding 40% as may be notified by the Government on the recommendations of the Council and collected in such manner as may be prescribed"
• Taxable person - "Shall be paid by the taxable person
C. Concept of Reverse Charge
(ix) Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines "reverse charge" to mean the liability to pay tax by the recipient of supply of goods or services or both instead of the supplier of such goods or services or both under sub-Section (3) or sub-Section (4) of Section 9 of the CGST Act or under sub-Section (3) or sub-Section (4) of Section 5 of the IGST Act. The impugned notifications are issued in exercise of the powers of the Union Government vested by the aforesaid Sections of the IGST Act or the CGST Act;
(x) A person covered by reverse charge becomes a taxable person in terms of Section 2(107) of the CGST Act read with Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act. Pertinently, Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act employs the language of "persons who are required to pay tax under reverse charge" and not "persons who are recipient of services Under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act 2017";
(xi) Section 5(3) of the IGST Act and Section 9(3) of the CGST Act permit the Government, on the recommendation of the GST Council, to specify the categories of goods or services or both, the tax for which shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the recipient of such goods or services or both;
(xii) Presently, neither the provisions nor the Rules have identified the taxable persons for reverse charge. Hence, the impugned notifications are a legitimate exercise of delegated legislation. Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 identifies an importer as a recipient for the purposes of reverse charge. The power to issue such a notification can be traced back to Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act;
D. Inter-state supply and Place of Supply
(xiii) The import of service in this case is an inter-state supply in terms of Section 7(4) read with Section 13(1) and 13(9) of the IGST Act. Although the contracting parties are foreign, the critical limb of the transaction happens in the taxable territory, namely, India. Hence, the transaction can also fall Under Section 7(5)(c) read with Section 13(1) and Section 13(9) of the IGST Act;
(xiv) Section 13(9) of the IGST Act stipulates that the place of supply of services of transportation of goods other than by way of mail or courier shall be the place of destination of such goods. Even though the contracting parties-the foreign shipping line and the foreign exporter-are outside the territory of India, the provision of service is for the Indian importer and consequently the consumption and exhaustion of service which is a critical limb, both commercially and legally, happens only in the hands of the Indian importer;
E. Time of Supply
(xv) Section 13(5) of the CGST Act contains a residual provision for determining time of supply to be the date on which the tax is paid. Since the other subsections in Section 13 are not applicable for construing the time of supply, Section 13(5) of the CGST Act would be applicable;
F. Composite Supply
(xvi) The CIF transaction and IGST on ocean freight are two independent transactions, entitled to suffer independent levies and do not qualify as a composite supply Under Section 2(30) of the CGST;
(xvii) GST and customs duties are not exclusive means of taxation. GST is a destination-based tax. The integrated tax is being sought to be imposed on the supply of service and not on the goods. Separate aspects are being taxed, hence it cannot be termed as overlapping. Moreover, the tax is on the value of goods, and not the freight. Tax paid at an anterior stage is not double taxation if it is included in the overall value;
(xviii) The discharge of reverse charge taxation does not make two independent contracts as a composite contract. The contract between the foreign shipping line and the foreign exporter is distinct and independent of the contract between the foreign exporter and the Indian importer. Their concomitance does not make them composite;
(xix) What is sought to be taxed on the supply of goods on CIF value basis is traceable to the proviso to Section 5(1) read with Sections 3(7) and 3(8) of the Customs Tariff Act. On the other hand, what is sought to be taxed under IGST on reverse charge basis derives power Under Section 5(1) (taxable person) read with Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act and Section 5(3) of the IGST Act and the impugned notifications;
(xx) A Constitution Bench of this Court in McDowell and Company Ltd. v. Commercial Tax Officer MANU/SC/0154/1985 : 1985 (3) SCC 230 ["McDowell"] has held that a single element can constitute the basis of a levy and can also form part of the value for another transaction. This cannot be termed as double taxation.
G. Extra-territoriality
(xxi) There is sufficient territorial nexus for the purpose of taxation since the importer is the final beneficiary of a service provided by a foreign shipping line by way of transportation up to the customs station of clearance in India. The transaction between the foreign exporter and the foreign shipping line has a nexus to the taxable territory of India. The importer is the beneficial owner of the goods at the time of clearance. The Appellant relies on the decisions of this Court in M/s. Electronic Corporation of India v. Commissioner ofIncome Tax MANU/SC/0331/1989 : 1989 Supp 2 SCC 642 and GVK Industries v. Income Tax Officers MANU/SC/0163/2011 : 2011 (4) SCC 36 ["GVK Industries"] where this Court has upheld taxing statutes having a territorial nexus to India;
H. Service recipient
(xxii) There are six reasons to term an Indian importer as the recipient of service:
(a) Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act envisages a recipient of an intangible service as one who does not pay consideration. In CIF transactions, the Indian importer does not pay for ocean freight and yet receives the benefit of transportation;
(b) Section 2 of the CGST Act is prefaced with "In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires" which warrants a broad interpretation of statutory definitions therein;
(c) Section 24(iii) read with Section 2(98) of the CGST Act, read with Section 5(3) of the IGST Act and the impugned notifications issued thereunder, allow any person to become a taxable person and such a taxable person becomes the recipient of supply of goods or services or both. Once 'any person' is identified as a taxable person for reverse charge under a notification issued under 5(3) of IGST Act, by sheer default of the definition of reverse charge Under Section 2(98) of the CGST Act, such a taxable person on reverse charge becomes a service recipient;
(d) Section 5(3) of the IGST Act clearly enables the identification of service recipients, and not just categories of goods or services or both. Anycontrary interpretation would be against the legislative intention. On a conjoint reading of Section 5(3) of the IGST Act read with Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, a service recipient can be identified through a notification;
(e) The definition of "supply" without consideration Under Section 7(c) of the CGST Act is not an exhaustive definition. Further, Section 2(31) of the CGST Act defines consideration and does not restrict its payment to only the owner of such goods and services; and
(f) Section 2(93)(c) of the CGST Act reads "..and any reference to a person to whom a supply is made, shall be construed as a reference to the recipient of the supply...". A supply can be made to 'a person', 'a registered person' and 'a taxable person' and such a supply shall be construed to be a supply to a recipient. Since the Indian importer would qualify under all the aforementioned categories, it can be termed as recipient of the service.
I. Applicability of Section 5(4) of the IGST Act
(xxiii) In the alternative, the impugned notifications would be saved by Section 5(4) of the IGST Act which permits the Union Government, on the recommendations of the GST Council, to specify a class of registered persons who shall in respect of specified categories of goods or services or both received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge basis as the recipient and all the provisions of the Act would apply to such a recipient;
(xxiv) It is admitted that the impugned notifications do not refer to Section 5(4) of the IGST Act. However, it is settled law that once a power is available to grant or identify the taxable person, taxable event, rate and measure, non-reference of the source of power will not vitiate its exercise and application in given facts and circumstances of the case;
J. Parliamentary legislation v. Excessive delegation
(xxv) This Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Birla Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills MANU/SC/0175/1968 : 1968 (3) SCR 251 and Avinder Singh v. State of Punjab 1979 (1) SCC 441 has held that only essential legislative functions, such as policy guidelines and framework, need to be performed by Parliament and the state legislatures. Once these are made available through the exercise of plenary power, the rest of the details can always emerge through the exercise of delegated powers;
(xxvi) The constitutional mandate of Articles 269A and 286 finds effect under the IGST Act. The IGST Act, and specifically Section 5(1) therein, has defined the subject matter of taxation (inter-state supply of goods and services), the taxable person Under Section 2(107) read with Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act, a maximum cap of 40 per cent and determination of taxable value in terms of Section 15 of the CGST Act. Only the identification of the taxable person is delegated to the Union Government which makes its decisions on the basis of the recommendations of the GST Council;
K. GST Council recommendations-Cooperative federalism and collaborative federalism
(xxvii) GST is a consumption tax and the tax jurisdiction extends to the place the supply is consumed. Since the foreign shipping line or foreign exporter are located in a non-taxable territory, the Indian importer has to be taxed on a reverse charge basis since the service is consumed in India. The purpose is to make the Indian shipping lines as competitive as foreign shipping lines. ITC is available to the importer and the tax paid on such a reverse charge can be offset in the importer's output tax liability. Therefore, there is no additional burden on the importer-it is a mere alteration of the mechanism;
(xxviii) The integrated tax was essential to level the playing field between foreign shipping lines and Indian shipping lines since the former were not required to charge any tax on the recipient of supply of service;
(xxix) The spirit of the cooperative federalism must guide the functioning of the GST Council as envisaged in Article 279A(6). This was espoused by this Court in Union of India v. VKC Footsteps India Private Limited MANU/SC/0629/2021 : (2022) 2 SCC 603 ("VKC Footsteps") where it was held that there is a need for a harmonised structure of goods and service tax. The GST Council is empowered to decide on every aspect of the GST law. The recommendations of the GST Council are binding on the executive and the legislature-while it frames laws relating to GST by the power Under Article 246A;
(xxx) The GST Council recommends the law, Rules and notifications through a voting architecture that is prescribed in Article 279A(6) and quorumrequirements in Article 279A(7). Every decision flows from one common source;
(xxxi) The GST Council is the only constitutional body which acts as a converging point or a platform for both the federal units to work in a harmonious manner in structuring the goods and service tax, in the process of developing a harmonised national market for goods and services;
(xxxii) Article 246A states that the power to legislate GST laws is only with the Union of India and the States. Neither can Article 279A override Article 246A nor can Article 246A be made subject to Article 279A. Judicial interpretation must strike a harmony such that Parliament, the state legislatures and the GST Council work in unison and harmony; and
(xxxiii) The constitutional scheme therefore envisages a two-step process. At the first level of the GST Council, Article 279A(6) envisages cooperative federalism and in the absence of either a non obstante Clause in Article 279A or a 'subject to' Clause in Article 246A, the need or requirement is that both the Union and the States should be supportive of this cooperative federalism through the process of collaborative federalism; and
(xxxiv) Section 5(1) of the IGST Act, by design, chooses to delegate certain functions to the GST Council in order to achieve the legislative object. Even though Article 246A does not subject Article 246A to Article 279A, the Union and States after exercising their legislative power and discretion Under Article 246A(1) have agreed to go by the recommendations of the GST Council in every aspect of the GST law wherever required. This is the spirit of collaborative federalism which must be respected by upholding the constitutional validity of the impugned notifications.
11. The learned ASG has urged the following supplementary submissions by way of rejoinder:
(i) The purpose of the integrated tax is to introduce a level playing field between foreign shipping lines and Indian shipping lines. It is a settled principle that to tax one subject, the revenue does not have to tax everything;
(ii) The Respondents have contended that the tax on an Indian importer is on a reverse charge basis, and therefore the importer does not fall under the definition of a 'taxable person'. However, Section 2(107) of the CGST Act defines a taxable person as any person registered or liable to be registered Under Section 22 or Section 24 of the CGST Act. Section 24 classifies persons liable for compulsory registration, and Section 24(iii) includes persons governed by the reverse charge mechanism;
(iii) In Laghu Udyog Bharati v. Union of India MANU/SC/0444/1999 : 1999 (6) SCC 418 ("Laghu Udyog"), this Court struck down the imposition of service tax on a reverse charge basis since the legislature had failed to identify the persons on whom service tax could be imposed, enforced and collected. However, Section 2(107) read with Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act specifically identifies the importer as a taxable person who is liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis. Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act also defines persons liable to pay tax on reverse charge as taxable persons;
(iv) The Respondents have argued that Under Section 5(1) of the IGST Act, the taxable value can be determined only through Section 15 of the CGST Act and its corresponding rules. It was contended that Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 prescribes the valuation of 10% of CIF value for the first time, which violates Section 5(1) of the IGST Act. The Appellant submits that in terms of Section 15(4) and Section 15(5) of the CGST Act, Rules 27 to 31 of the Central Goods and Service Tax Rules 201716 have been formulated. The Revenue can also assess the transaction by taking aid of a residual method prescribed under Rule 31 of the CGST Rules. Any discretion vested in quasi-judicial authorities must be regulated. The corrigendum dated 30 June 2016 amending Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 and prescribing the methodology for determining valuation can be read as a guideline for dealing with infirmities in assessment practices. It is only a reference or a guideline for making assessments. Even if it were to be held inapplicable, the revenue can assess the transaction under Rule 31 of the CGST Rules. Thus, Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 does not impinge on Rule 31 of the CGST Rules but only aids uniformity;
(v) The Respondents rely on Section 2(87) of the CGST Act and Section 5 of the IGST Act to argue that prescription can only be through rules, and not notifications. However, Section 15(1), (2) and (3) of the IGST Act prescribes values. Section 15(4) and 15(5) of the IGST Act deals with cases where the valuation cannot be determined Under Section 15(1). Rule 31 of the CGSTRules also enables the valuation to be conducted through "reasonable means". Thus, delegation is envisaged in the statutory mechanism;
(vi) If the expression "by the recipient" is to be given a static meaning as those falling Under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, then one would be denuding the power to notify persons for reverse charge Under Sections 5(1) and 5(3) of the IGST Act read with Section 24(iii) of the CGST Act.
(vii) Alternatively, the concept of reverse charge and notifying persons liable for reverse charge is envisaged in the statutory mechanism. Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines reverse charge as imposed "only on the recipient". Section 2(93) of the CGST Act defines a recipient. An Indian importer can be a recipient in six ways that have been elaborated in the submissions. The Indian importer does not pay any consideration of service in CIF imports since consideration is paid by the foreign exporter. Section 2 is illustrative and not rigid. A "person", as defined Under Section 2(84), is deemed to be the recipient of a service if such person satisfies the conditions under 2(93) of the CGST Act. Section 5(3) of the IGST Act contemplates the applicability of all provisions of the Act to the recipient. The fact that consideration is paid by the foreign exporter to the foreign shipping line does not vitiate the IGST Act's scheme which enables payment of tax on a reverse charge basis;
(viii) Section 13(9) of the IGST Act states that the destination of the goods shall be the place of supply, which is on Indian territory. This Court in Union of India v. Jalyan Udyog MANU/SC/0025/1994 : 1994 (1) SCC 318 has held that deeming fictions can be created even by the executive, i.e. through delegated legislation.
(ix) In case of a foreign exporter and a foreign shipping line, there is a nexus with India since the importer would be Indian. Forward charge taxation is envisaged in direct tax. Section 9(1)(6) of the Income Tax Act 1961 taxes a non-resident outside India since the income is generated in India;
(x) The decision of this Court in BSNL v. Union of India MANU/SC/1091/2006 : 2006 (3) SCC 1 ("BSNL") on double taxation has no applicability to this case since that was on the question of the overlap of VAT and service tax in the pre-GST regime and was decided on the ground of the impingement on the exclusive domain of the Union to impose service tax under Entry 97, List I;
(xi) In the alternative, the integrated tax derives authority from Section 5(4) of the IGST Act which permits the government to specify a class of registered persons who receive goods or supplies from an unregistered supplier, who shall pay the tax on a reverse charge basis as the recipient. If this Section is deemed applicable, then the importers would be liable for tax with effect from 1 February 2019, though exempted for the period from 13 October 2017 till 31 January 2019;
(xii) The creation of the GST Council Under Article 279A embodies the spirit of collaborative federalism. The GST Council is constitutionally mandated,particularly Under Article 279A(6), to promote harmony and alignment amongst the federal partners;
(xiii) Under Article 279A(4), decisions of the GST Council transform into recommendations to the Unions and the States. The GST Council is the only constitutional body that acts as a converging space or platform for the federal units to work in a harmonious matter. The principal function of the GST Council is to take decisions, which are conveyed as recommendations. These recommendations have a unique constitutional status and they are overridden in exceptional circumstances;
(xiv) It was contended by the Respondents that instead of course correcting the input tax mechanism, the revenue has chosen to tax the Indian importer on reverse charge. This is more a policy than a perceptional issue. As long as the tax is legal and valid, the manner and mode of taxation need not be questioned. A better manner and mode would not result in the exercise of legislative discretion being declared to be invalid or illegal; and
(xv) The integrated tax was introduced to ensure a level playing field between foreign and Indian shipping lines. This objective must be appreciated while determining constitutionality.
B.2 Respondent-Assessees
12. Mr. V Sridharan, learned senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents17 has urged the following submissions:
(i) Under Section 5(4) of the IGST Act, the Government cannot specify the person liable to pay service tax on a reverse charge basis:
(a) Section 5(3) of the IGST Act provides that the Government may specify the categories of supply of goods or services or both on which the tax shall be paid on reverse charge basis by the recipient of the goods or services. Thus, the power Under Section 5(3) is only to specify the categories of supply, while the liability to pay tax is fixed on the recipient. The Government cannot specify the person liable to pay tax on reverse charge basis Under Section 5(3);
(b) Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 has been issued Under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act. Since the power flows from Section 5(3), the Government can by a notification only specify the 'categories of supply', as the liability for tax has been determined by Parliament;
(c) In contrast with Section 5(3), prior to the introduction of GST, Section 68(2) of the Finance Act 1994 provided that the service tax shall be paid by "such person...as may be prescribed". In that case, the liability of tax was not determined by the legislation;
(d) Under the CGST Act and the IGST Act, the only place where a person other than a supplier or recipient is made liable to pay tax is Under Section 5(5) of the IGST Act, where an electronic commerce operator through whom supply is made is taxed; and
(e) In case the Parliament desired the tax to be collected from a person other than a supplier or recipient, it would have expressly provided so in the legislation. Since Parliament has specified the person liable for tax, it is not a matter to be governed by delegated legislation;
(ii) Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines 'reverse charge' as the liability to pay tax by the recipient of supply of goods or services or both instead of the supplier of such goods or services or both. In other words, only the recipient can be made liable to pay tax under reverse charge basis and the reverse charge cannot be disintegrated from the recipient of supply;
(iii) Section 5(3) clearly stipulates that (i) the tax shall be paid on a reverse charge basis and (ii) the tax is payable by the recipient;
(iv) GST laws contemplate only one recipient for one supply:
(a) The interpretation of the ASG that the foreign exporter is the recipient under Clause (a) of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act and the Indian importer is the recipient under Clause (c) of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act leads to absurdity;
(b) Under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act, a 'recipient' is defined with reference to three situations-(a) where consideration is payable for the supply of goods or services or both, (b) where no consideration is payable for the supply of goods and (c) where no consideration is payable for the supply of a service. Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Section 2(93) are mutually exclusive and cannot apply simultaneously. In case the supply of goods or services is for consideration, Clause (a) applies and the recipient is the person who is liable to pay the consideration;
(c) The question of who is the beneficiary of the supply or who has received the supply are irrelevant in determining the 'recipient' Under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act;
(d) Whether a supply of service is an 'inter-state supply' Under Section 7(3) or 'intra-state supply' Under Section 8(2) of the IGST Act depends on the location of the supplier and the place of supply. In case there are two recipients of a single supply, as argued by the ASG, then the transaction may become inter-state as well as intra-state supply. Such a situation has not been envisaged by Parliament;
(e) Only the recipient of the supply is entitled to avail input tax credit. In case there are two recipients of a single supply, two persons will be allowed to avail credit of tax by the supplier;
(f) The rate of tax is often dependent on the recipient of the supply. For instance, services supplied to Government, local authorities or charitable institutions, are exempted or liable to a lower rate of tax. If there are two recipients, this would result in an anomaly; and
(g) Even in case of a three-party transaction involving supply of goods, Section 10(1)(b) of the IGST Act provides that the place of supply of goods is the principal place of business of the recipient, and not the person to whom the goods are delivered;
(v) The last leg of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act does not create a separate category of recipient:
(a) Section 2(93) provides three categories of recipients, namely, where consideration is payable for supply of goods or services; where no consideration is payable for supply of goods; and where no consideration is payable for supply of services;
(b) Section 2(93) also provides that any reference to a person to whom supply is made shall be construed as a reference to the recipient of supply and shall include an agent acting on behalf of the recipient; and
(c) The above provision implies that if the Act does not use the term 'recipient' but makes a reference to the person to whom supply is made, then they shall be construed as a 'recipient'. It does not however, create a new category of recipient.
(vi) The taxable event for levy of GST is 'supply' of goods or service. In the absence of supply, no tax can be levied under IGST, CGST or State Goods and Services Tax Act18:
(a) Article 366(12A) of the Constitution defines the 'goods and services tax' as the tax on 'supply' of goods or services or both;
(b) Section 5 of the IGST Act, which is the charging Section for levy of tax, also states that the IGST will be levied on all inter-State 'supplies' of goods or services or both; and
(c) Each transaction has to be evaluated independently to determine its taxability. The transaction of supply takes place between the contracting parties, that is, at whose instance the supply is made;
(vii) The CGST Act does not envisage a taxable supply without consideration, other than those specified in Schedule I:
(a) Clause (a) of Section 7(1) of the CGST Act defines the term 'supply' as all forms of supply of goods or services made for a consideration in the course of or in furtherance of business. Clause (b) of Section 7(1) of the CGST Act provides that import of service for a consideration will be included in the term 'supply' even if it is not made in the course or furtherance of business. Clause (c) provides that activities specified in Schedule I will be included in the term 'supply' even if they are made without consideration;
(b) Clause (a) requires two conditions to be satisfied: (i) that the activity has been made in the furtherance of business and (ii) made for a consideration. In Clause (b), the condition of the supply being made in the course of business is absent. In Clause (c), the condition of supply being made for a consideration has not been incorporated but this only for activities provided in Schedule I; and
(c) The argument that supplies can be made without consideration for activities other than those specified in Schedule I would make Clause (c) of Section 7(1) redundant.
(viii) Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 cannot be sustained Under Section 5(4) of the IGST Act:
(a) The unamended Section 5(4) of the IGST Act provides that integrated tax in respect of supplies made by an unregistered supplier to a registered person shall be paid by such person on reverse charge basis as a recipient of supply;
(b) The Section was a standalone section, operating on its own, and did not require anything to be specified by way of a notification. Thus, Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 cannot be sustained Under Section 5(4);
(c) Pursuant to the Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Act 2018, Section 5(4) was amended w.e.f. 1 February 2019 to provide that the Government may, based on the recommendations of the GST Council, by notification, specify a class of registered persons who shall, in respect of supply of specified categories of goods or services or both received from an unregistered supplier, pay the tax on reverse charge basis as the recipient;
(d) The reliance placed by the Government on the amended Section 5(4) of the IGST Act to justify Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 is erroneous as:
• There was no power to issue a notification specifying the class of registered person liable to pay tax under reverse charge basis Under Section 5(4) at the time when the impugned notification was issued on 28 June 2017. The power has been granted by amendment w.e.f. 1 February 2019;
• Section 2(93) of the CGST Act provides that any reference to a person to whom supply is made shall be construed as reference to the recipient of supply. Thus, the person Under Section 5(4) who has received the supply is the recipient of the supply. Even after the amendment of Section 5(4), only the recipient can be specified as a person liable to pay tax; and
• Section 2(98) of the CGST Act defines 'reverse charge' as the liability to pay tax by the recipient of the supply instead of the supplier. Thus, only the recipient can be made liable to pay tax on a reverse charge basis;
(ix) Section 13(9) of the IGST Act is only relevant to determine the place of supply and not the recipient of supply. Whether the supply of service is an export of services Under Section 2(6)(a) of the IGST Act or an import of services Under Section 2(11), read with Section 7(4) of the IGST Act; or an inter-State supply of service, is not determined by Section 13(9);
(x) Notification 10/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 has been issued on the recommendation of the GST Council Under Section 5(3) of the IGST Act and not Under Article 279A of the Constitution. If the GST Council intended to make a recommendation deeming the importer as recipient of supply, then the proper course of implementation would be to make an amendment in the IGST Act and seek Parliamentary approval;
(xi) The objective of the tax or levy cannot validate an ultra vires levy:
(a) The Government has contended that the levy of tax on services of transportation of goods into India provided by a person in a non-taxable territory to a person in a non-taxable territory, has been introduced to create parity for Indian shipping lines with foreign shippers;
(b) The notification for the levy and reverse charge has been lifted from the erstwhile service tax regime into the GST regime without considering the changes in language in Section 5(3) of the IGST Act as opposed to Section 68(2) of the Finance Act 1994. Thus, the notification is ultra vires the Act;
(xii) The scheme of IGST Act does not envisage a person other than the supplier or the recipient as a person liable to pay tax:
(a) The time of supply of services is determined according to Section 20 of the IGST Act along with Section 12 and 13 of the CGST Act. Section 12 deals with the time of supply of goods and Section 13 deals with the time of supply of services;
(b) Section 13(1) states that the liability to pay tax on services arises at the time of supply. Sub-section (2) determines the time of supply on forward charge basis. Sub-section (3) deals with time of supply when tax is payable on reverse charge basis. Under this sub-section, time of supply of services is the earliest date of payment entered in the books of accounts of the recipient or the date of debit in the bank account or sixty days from the date of last issue of invoice by the supplier. Thus, a person other than a recipient cannot determine the time of supply;
(c) Section 13(5) of the CGST Act is only relevant for determining the time of supply in case of clandestine supply or evasion of tax and cannot be used to determine time of supply for ocean freight services;
(d) The provisions relating to filing of returns apply whether a person is a supplier or a recipient of supply, or apply only to an outward supply and an inward supply. The supply of ocean freight service is neither an inward supply nor an outward supply;
(xiii) In case of CIF contracts, the customer contracts for a supply of delivered goods at the port of destination. The contract for transportation of goods is entered into by the foreign exporter with the foreign shipper. Thus, the person liable to pay consideration to the foreign shipper is the foreign exporter. The importer of goods in India is not the person liable to pay the consideration, and is thus, not the 'recipient' of the service;
(xiv) The contract of the Indian importer with the foreign exporter is for supply of delivered goods. The service of transportation is a component of the supply of goods similar to raw material, manufacturing cost or employee cost of the supplier. To contend that the purchaser has received the supply of raw material or the services of an employee is illogical. Similarly, the argument that the Indian importer has received transportation services is irrational; and
(xv) Serial No. 9(ii) of Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 read with Para 4 and Serial No. 10 of Notification No. 9 of 2017-Integrated Tax (Rate) dated 28 June 2019 describe the services as provided by a person located in a non-taxable territory to a person located in a non-taxable territory. These notifications recognise the exporter as the recipient of the service of ocean freight;
(xvi) The argument of the ASG that the IGST paid on goods at the time of import is a customs duty and not a tax, and thus, there is no dual levy of tax recovered on ocean freight from the exporter is erroneous:
(a) The present case involves outright purchase of goods and thus, it is a supply of goods under GST and an import of goods according to customs law. The issue is whether the transaction is an import of goods under customs law, but a supply of service under GST law;
(b) Section 5(1) of the IGST Act is the charging section. The proviso to Section 5(1) states that integrated tax on goods imported into India shall be levied and collected in accordance with Section 3 of the Customs Tariff Act on the value as determined under the Customs Tariff Act and at the point when duties of customs are levied Under Section 12 of the Customs Act;
(c) Section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act provides that any Article imported into India shall, in addition, be liable to integrated tax;
(d) Both the proviso to Section 5(1) of the IGST Act and Section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act provide that goods imported into India shall be liable to integrated tax;
(e) The contention that the proviso to Section 5(1) of the IGST Act does not contain the word 'supply' and thus, the tax is imposed on import of goods irrespective of whether the transaction is supply or not, is erroneous;
(f) The absence of the word 'supply' in the proviso will not lead to an extreme result that the transaction of import of goods becomes leviable to IGST even if it is not supply;
(g) The CGST Act has at various instances, such as Section 11(1), Section 12(1), Section 13(1) and Section 49(9), omitted the word 'supply' and merely mentioned the liability to pay tax on goods or services;
(h) The proviso Under Section 5(1) of the IGST Act read with Section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act implies that the tax is leviable only on supply of goods imported into India;
(i) The amount collected as IGST on import of goods is apportioned between the Union and States as per Article 269A of the Constitution which provides for apportionment of GST on inter-state supply of goods or service. If import IGST was a customs duty, then the revenue proceeds would be distributed in accordance with Article 270 of the Constitution;
(j) At the introduction of GST, the understanding of the Government was in consonance with the above legal position and accordingly, the Government issued a notification exempting goods and services imported from an SEZ unit or developer under the IGST Act. Subsequently, the Government rescinded the above exemption notifications and issued separate notifications under the Customs Act and IGST Act; and
(k) The Government has also issued various notifications exempting payment of IGST in case of import of goods on lease or temporary import basis. The intention of Government is not to impose IGST in case of import of goods that do not amount to supply.
13. Mr. Harish Salve, learned senior counsel, appearing on behalf of the Respondent19 has submitted:
(i) A CIF contract is an inclusive price covering cost of goods, insurance and freight payable for carriage of goods to the destination specified in the contract. The essence of the contract is that a seller having shipped the goods in accordance with the contract, can fulfil his part of the bargain by tendering to the buyer the proper shipping documents. If he does this, he is not in breach even if the goods are lost before such tender. In the event of a loss, the buyer must pay the price on tender of documents and his remedies lie against the carrier but not the seller;
(ii) A CIF contract has two components: (i) price is paid for the freight, and (ii) the buyer is never obligated to pay it. The owner of the vessel who enters into a contract of affreightment has a privity of contract with the supplier of goodsand is rendering a service to the supplier. If the service is not received, then the question of reverse charge does not arise;
(iii) Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the IGST Act are merely machinery provisions for collection of tax, and not the charging provision:
(a) Section 5(1) is the charging Section which levies IGST. Since there is no separate levy Under Section 5(1) on ocean freight, as it is an import of goods which already suffers IGST on CIF value, the question of reverse charge does not arise;
(b) The proviso to Section 5(1) clarifies that the 'value as determined' is only the measure of tax and not the subject of tax; and
(c) Section 5(3) cannot be treated as the charging Section as it would make it possible for the Government to impose separate taxes Under Sections 5(1) and 5(3) and charge for the services at both ends;
(iv) There must be a taxable event in the CIF contract of the kind contemplated under the IGST Act. In case there is no such event, it cannot be created through delegated legislation by the GST Council. There is an absence of a statutory fiction by which a CIF contract can be split into a contract for supply of goods and services, and creating a second layer of fiction by which the shipper is rendering a service to the supplier of goods. Thus, the question of levy of tax by the GST Council does not arise;
(v) In the transaction of import of coal on CIF basis in the present case, the recipient will fall under Clause (a) of Section 2(93) of the CGST Act as consideration is payable for the service of shipping. The mere fact that an Indian is the recipient will not lead to the Indian recipient making the payment separately under the contract of affreightment. The Indian recipient is only a recipient of goods, not of service;
(vi) The law recognises and maintains the integrity of a CIF contract Under Section 2(30) read with Section 2(93), and Section 8. These Sections maintain the integrity of a composite contract by providing that where the goods come with insurance and freight, the tax is imposed only on supply of goods;
(vii) The High Court has held that that the notifications under challenge were ultra vires. The Government has not urged that any of these findings are incorrect and has only contended that Section 5(1) of the IGST Act satisfies all ingredients of a valid tax law;
(viii) Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 is ultra vires the IGST Act. Section 5(1) of the IGST Act only empowers the issuance of notifications for rates and requires other provisions to be prescribed. Section 5(1) does not empower the Government to define 'description of service' which is an essential legislative function;
(ix) Entry 9(ii) of Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 imposes a tax on ocean freight in import of goods. Such a power however, has not been provided in the statute;
(x) Para 4 of Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 determines the 'value of service' as 10% of the CIF value, which is contrary to Section 15(1) of the CGST Act which says 'transaction value';
(xi) Article 366(12A) defines goods and services tax as involving only supply of goods or services or both. Section 7 of the IGST Act has made a clear distinction between standalone supply of goods, standalone supply of services and standalone supply of 'goods or services or both'. Section 7(4) treats standalone services imported into India as inter-State supply and does not artificially bifurcate by assuming ocean freight in the transaction of import of goods;
(xii) Section 13 of the IGST Act has no application in the case which relates to import of goods and not services standalone. Section 13 applies to place of supply of services, referring to standalone services, and does not use the term 'both' to apply to supply of goods or services; and
(xiii) IGST Act has no extra-territorial application as the Act extends to the whole of India. Under Section 2(109) of the CGST Act, taxable territory means the territory to which the Act applies. Further, GVK Industries (supra) states that Parliament may exercise its powers with respect to an extra-territorial aspect when it has a nexus with India. It does not however empower delegated legislation to exercise such power. Thus, the activity brought within the tax net by the impugned notifications is contrary to the IGST Act.
14. Mr. Arvind Datar, learned senior counsel, appearing on behalf of the Respondent20 has submitted:
(i) The levy of IGST on ocean freight by way of Notification No. 10/2017-Integrated Tax (Rate) : MANU/GSIT/0014/2017 is extra-territorial and ultra vires Section 1 read with Section 2(22) of the IGST Act:
(a) The levy imposed is on the service of transportation of goods rendered by the shipping line to the foreign vendor/exporter, occurring outside the territory of India, that is outside the taxable territory;
(b) The only nexus of the service with India is that the service results in the import of goods into India. However, this activity is already subject to IGST under the IGST Act and customs duty under the Customs Act;
(c) For a levy to be imposed under the IGST Act, the service must be a 'supply' under the provisions of IGST Act read with Section 7 of the CGST Act. However, Section 1 of the CGST Act and IGST Act are limited to the territory of India. Thus, any service received outside the territory of India cannot be considered to be 'supply' under the IGST Act or the CGST Act;
(d) To impose a levy on a service that is extra-territorial, there has to be a deeming fiction in the form of a statutory provision which deems the supply of transportation by a vessel to a non-resident exporter. In this case, such a deeming fiction does not exist. Thus, the transportation service cannot be deemed as a 'supply' under the IGST Act;
(e) Only once the service provided outside the territory of India is deemed as a 'supply' by way of statute, can there be a determination of the supplier and the recipient;
(f) By way of the impugned notification, the freight charges incurred abroad are sought to be taxed in India on the ground that the service recipient is in India. If this argument is accepted, then any service (such as insurance or incidental services) rendered abroad can be taxed in India on the ground that the recipient is in India. This practice is in contrast with international taxation laws and will lead to hardship for Indian importers;
(g) Article 245(2) of the Constitution states that a law made by the Parliament will not be invalid on the ground that it has extra-territorial operation. However, the expression 'law made by the Parliament' does not include executive notifications, even if made on the recommendations of the GST Council; and
(h) Tax can be levied outside the territory of India by way of primary legislation. For instance, Under Sections 6 and 7 of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act 1976, a legal fiction is created by which India has the power to levy tax in the Exclusive Economic Zone and Continental Shelf. Pursuant to this fiction, notifications levying customs duty on supplies made to oil drilling rigs in the Continental Shelf have been issued. In the absence of a primary legislation or statutory provision to this effect, notifications cannot impose duties on activities occurring outside India;
(ii) The value of a CIF contract is indivisible, making the computation of tax on such a contract impossible:
(a) The only way to artificially dissect the value of a CIF contract is by way of statute, which is absent in this case;
(b) If such a division is allowed, then the Government will be able to tax not just ocean freight, but also insurance services; and
(c) Levy on contracts on a CIF basis will lead to hardships for the Indian recipients. The advantage of entering into CIF contracts is to ensure that the foreign supplier is responsible for arranging transportation and insurance. However, if a CIF contract is made subject to GST, then the Indian importers will have to make their own arrangements to transport the goods, book an insurance policy and arrange for shipping;
(iii) The ASG's reliance on the nexus theory to justify the levy of GST on ocean freight, by equating it to the imposition of income tax on income accruing in India or customs duty imposed on goods imported into India-is erroneous:
(a) In case of imposition of income tax, the nexus is provided by way of a deeming fiction Under Section 5(2) of the Income Tax Act 1961, where a non-resident is liable to tax only if the income is deemed to accrue or arises in India;
(b) In case of customs duty, the taxing event is the goods entering the territory of India; and
(c) In the absence of such a provision, the freight services rendered outside India cannot be deemed to be received in India merely because the recipient is in India.
(iv) The importer is not the 'recipient' of services Under Section 2(93) of the CGST Act:
(a) Under Clause (c) of Section 2(93), when there is no consideration payable for the supply of services, then the person to whom the services are rendered is the service recipient. However, in this case, the importer is not the service recipient as the importer does not pay the consideration or receive the services;
(b) The argument of the ASG that the importer is a 'recipient' as they are the ultimate beneficiary enlarges the scope of Section 2(93) by adding words that are absent in the statute;
(c) Even if the ultimate beneficiary is considered to be the recipient, the importer is not the beneficiary of the service of transportation of goods. Under the terms of a CIF contract, the foreign vendor is obligated to arrange for transportation of goods for which he engages the services of a shipping line. Thus, the foreign vendor is the ultimate beneficiary;
(d) The importer is only the beneficiary of the imported goods, whose value is taxable as customs duty under the Customs Tariff Act as well as under the IGST Act; and
(e) Additionally, reliance cannot be placed on clause(c) of Section 2(93) as it only refers to those supplies for which consideration is not paid as mentioned in Schedule I of the CGST Act. This Schedule enumerates the activities deemed as supplies without consideration.
(v) Imposition of IGST on ocean freight will lead to double taxation:
(a) Section 3(7) of the Customs Tariff Act states that goods imported into India will be subject to IGST Under Section 5 of the IGST Act, on the value as determined by Section 3(8) and Section 3(8)(a). Under Section 3(8), the value includes value of freight; and
(b) Rule 10 of the Customs Valuation (Determination of Value of Imported Goods) Rules 2007 includes cost of transportation and insurance in the value of goods, which forms the basis of the levy of IGST under the proviso to Section 5 of the IGST Act. The impugned levy of IGST on ocean freight would thus amount to double taxation on the same transaction;
(vi) The ASG's reliance on 'aspect theory' to justify the impugned levy is erroneous:
(a) The ASG relied on the 'aspect theory' and submitted that the impugned notification taxes the 'service' element of ocean freight, while the 'goods' element is taxed under the proviso to Section 5 of the IGST Act. However, such an approach is impermissible according to the decision of this Court in BSNL (supra);
(b) The aspect theory is inapplicable as the freight element is included by levying IGST; and
(c) The aspect theory in India permits taxation of two different aspects or features of a transaction. For instance, in a catering contract, supply of food was subject to value added tax and the service aspect was subject to service tax. However, the aspect theory does not permit double taxation of the same amount or value
(vii) The GST Council which has been created by Article 279A of the Constitution is a recommendatory body, whose recommendations can be implemented by either amending the CGST Act or the IGST Act or by issuing a notification. However, notifications issued cannot be ultra vires the parent legislation;
(viii) The principles of cooperative federalism are not relevant in this case as they were not adjudicated before the High Court. The appeal must test the correctness of the impugned judgment without expanding its scope; and
(ix) Interpretation of Article 279A of the Constitution was not an issue before the High Court and the present appeal should be restricted to the validity of the impugned notification.
15. In addition to the above, Mr. Vikram Nankani, learned senior counsel, appearing on behalf of the Respondent21 urged the following submissions:
(i) Section 7(4) of the IGST Act provides that supply of services imported into the territory of India shall be treated as a supply of services in the course of interstate trade or commerce. Section 2(11) of the IGST Act defines "import of services" when the supplier of service is located outside India, the recipient of service is located in India and the place of supply of service is in India. When these provisions are read together, it implies that in case of import of services into the territory of India, the location of the supplier of services is outside India and the location of the recipient is in India. Thus the IGST Act coverseither import of goods or import of services and not services subsumed into the value of goods imported into India;
(ii) The IGST Act was never intended to apply to the importer of goods on a CIF basis as the services are provided and consumed before the goods reach India and have no nexus with the Indian importer;
(iii) The transaction between two persons located outside India is not chargeable Under Section 5(1) read with the proviso and Section 7(4) read with Section 2(11) of the IGST Act. Thus, Notification 8/2017 : MANU/GSIT/0006/2017 is ultra vires and Notification 10/2017, providing for reverse charge is also ultra vires the IGST Act;
(iv) Section 13(9) of the IGST Act, which states that the place of supply of services of transportation of goods is the destination of the goods, cannot be read in isolation. Read with Section 7(4) of the IGST Act, it implies that in case of import of services, the supplier must be outside India while recipient must be in India; and
(v) The test of 'ultimate beneficiary' relied upon by the ASG does not have statutory backing since the charging section, that is Section 5, makes the recipient of the services liable to pay tax. The Indian importer is not a party to the CIF contract between the foreign exporter and the shipping line.
16. Mr. Uchit Sheth, counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondents22 submitted:
(i) The importers in a CIF contract do not have any privity of contract with the supplier of the transportation service since they neither make payment ofconsideration to the service provider, nor avail any service. The importers only purchase and import goods;
(ii) The impugned levy is contrary to the object and purpose of the IGST Act. Section 5 of the IGST Act clarifies that so far as imported goods are concerned, IGST is levied at the point of clearance of goods for home consumption and on the total value (including value additions till that point). This was also clarified by Circular No. 3/1/2018-IGST : MANU/IGCR/0001/2018 dated 25 May 2018 issued by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs. The impugned levy of IGST on the freight element of CIF contracts and high seas purchase contracts is ultra vires as IGST is paid on the total value of goods;
(iii) In Ispat Industries Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs MANU/SC/4125/2006 : (2006) 12 SCC 583, in the context of imposition of customs duty, it was held that in a CIF contract, the freight is part of the price paid to the seller and further addition of transportation charges is contrary to the statutory provisions; and
(iv) The judgment of this Court in Union of India v. Jalyan Udyog MANU/SC/0025/1994 : (1994) 1 SCC 318 which states that a legal fiction can be created even by delegated legislation, is inapplicable as in that case, the fiction created was within the parameters of the parent provision. In this case, the fiction violates Section 5(3) of the IGST Act.
17. Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gautam, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the intervenor23 in SLP(C) No. 13958/2020, has submitted that the argument of the ASG that the levy has been introduced to create a level playing field is fallacious as:
(i) Prior to 2016, all import transportation, whether undertaken by Indian or foreign shipping lines was outside the scope of levy. Service tax was imposed on import transactions undertaken by Indian shipping lines only to allow them to avail CENVAT credit. This credit was protected even though no service tax was payable on export transportation. Further, Indian importers availing services of foreign shipping lines were liable to pay service tax under reverse charge. This position continued under the GST regime and the only transaction outside the ambit was when the foreign exporter availed the services of a foreign shipping line to transport goods to India; and
(ii) The introduction of levy of service tax or GST on import transactions was by way of an incentive to Indian shipping lines. Thus, it cannot now be contended that the level playing field has been affected because of this levy.
18. Similar submissions have been addressed by Dr C Manickam24, Mr. Rajat Mittal25 and Mr. Abhishek A Rastogi26, which we have not recorded separately for the sake of brevity.
19. The rival submissions will now be analysed.
C. Constitutional Architecture of GST
20. Before we proceed to analyse the vires of the impugned notifications, it is pertinent to contextualize the constitutional architecture of the GST. The Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment Act) 201627 was enacted on 8 September 2016 introducing Article 246A and 279A. Article 246A stipulates that both the Parliament and the State legislatures have the power to legislate on GST:
246A. Special provisions with respect to goods and services tax (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 246 and 254, Parliament, and, subject to Clause (2), the Legislature of every State, have power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by such State.
(2) Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to goods and services tax where the supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
Explanation: The provisions of this article, shall, in respect of goods and services tax referred to in Clause (5) of Article 279A, take effect from the date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax Council.
Article 279A constitutes the GST Council which shall make recommendations to the Union and the States on a wide range of subjects relating to GST:
279A. (1) The President shall, within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, by order, constitute a Council to be called the Goods and Services Tax Council.
(2) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall consist of the following members, namely:--
(a) the Union Finance Minister ...................... Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or Finance ................................................................ Member;
(c) the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other Minister nominated by each State Government ........................................................ Members.
(3) The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred to in Sub-clause (c) of Clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose one amongst themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council for such period as they may decide.
(4) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall make recommendations to the Union and the States on--(a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Union, the States and the local bodies which may be subsumed in the goods and services tax;
(b) the goods and services that may be subjected to, or exempted from the goods and services tax;
(c) model Goods and Services Tax Laws, principles of levy, apportionment of Goods and Services Tax levied on supplies in the course of inter-State trade or commerce Under Article 269A and the principles that govern the place of supply;
(d) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services may be exempted from goods and services tax;
(e) the rates including floor rates with bands of goods and services tax;
(f) any special rate or rates for a specified period, to raise additional resources during any natural calamity or disaster;
(g) special provision with respect to the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand; and
(h) any other matter relating to the goods and services tax, as the Council may decide.
(5) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall recommend the date on which the goods and services tax be levied on petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas and aviation turbine fuel.
(6) While discharging the functions conferred by this article, the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be guided by the need for a harmonised structure of goods and services tax and for the development of a harmonised national market for goods and services.
(7) One-half of the total number of Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall constitute the quorum at its meetings.
(8) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall determine the procedure in the performance of its functions.
(9) Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be taken at a meeting, by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes of the members present and voting, in accordance with the following principles, namely:--
(a) the vote of the Central Government shall have a weightage of one third of the total votes cast, and (b) the votes of all the State Governments taken together shall have a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast, in that meeting.
(10) No act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be invalid merely by reason of--
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Council; or
(c) any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the merits of the case.
(11) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall establish a mechanism to adjudicate any dispute--
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other side; or
(c) between two or more States, arising out of the recommendations of the Council or implementation thereof.
21. The Union Government has contended that the recommendations of the GST Council are binding on the legislature and the executive. It was submitted that since the recommendations are binding, the Rule making power of the Government under the provisions of the IGST Act and CGST Act, exercisable on the 'recommendations' of the GST Council, are also very wide. The arguments of the Union Government are as follows:
(i) A combined reading of Articles 246A and 279A elucidates that the GST Council is the ultimate decision-making body in framing the GST law since it is a constitutional body that acts as a converging platform for both the Union and the States;
(ii) The functions and role of the GST Council are unique and incomparable to other constitutional bodies. Therefore, interpretations of other provisions of the Constitution do not have precedential value while interpreting the role of the GST Council;
(iii) The power of the Parliament and the State Legislature Under Article 246A and the power of the GST Council Under Article 279A must be balanced and harmonised, such that neither overrides the other:
(a) Though Article 279A does not begin with a non-obstante Clause overriding Article 246A, the latter would not override the former. The core theme of GST law-as it emanates from Article 279(6)-is cooperation and harmony. A system premised on cooperation cannot provide inter se supremacy. Therefore, Article 279A has rightly not been given an overriding effect over Article 246A; and
(b) Article 246A vests the Parliament and the State legislatures with the power to enact laws on GST. This function, if delegated would amount to abdication of the Parliament's constitutional function. Therefore, Article 246A cannot be made subject to Article 279A.
(iv) The ordinary legislative process for enacting a statute is that bills are introduced and voted on by the legislature. However, Article 264A departs from this as the framing of the policy, discussion on the policy, and decision making are vested with the GST Council. The Parliament or the State Legislature cannot legislate a law on GST Under Article 246A independent of the recommendations of the GST Council. A reading of Sections 5, 6 and 22 of the IGST Act indicates that the legislature and the executive are bound by the recommendations of the GST Council on three preliminary provisions, namely charge, exemption and rule-making power. Therefore, Parliament bound itself to the recommendations of the GST Council by enacting the IGST Act and CGST Act; and
(v) The recommendations by the GST Council are transformed into legislation on a combined reading of Article 279A and Sections 5, 6, and 22 of the IGST Act 2017 and Sections 9, 11, and 164 of the CGST Act.
C. 1 Legislative History of the Constitution Amendment Act 2016
Statement of Objects and Reasons
22. As early as in 2004, the Task Force on implementation of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act 2003 had recommended a shift to consumption taxes to increase efficiency in production and enhance international competitiveness of Indian goods and services. The need for such an enormous change in the tax regime arose out of the distortions in the then existing indirect tax regime which suffered from the drawback of multiplicity of taxes, taxable events, compliances, and authorities. For instance, the rate of the sales tax and value added tax on the same goods would differ across India. Several states would impose entry taxes on goods before the goods entered their boundaries. The First Discussion Paper on Goods and Services Tax in India released by the Empowered Committee in November 2009 explained the rationale for introducing the GST regime in the following terms:28
The introduction of GST at the Central level will not only include comprehensively more indirect Central Taxes and integrate goods and service taxes for the purpose of set-off relief, but may also lead to revenue gain for the Centrethrough widening of the dealer base by capturing value added addition in the distributive trade and increased compliance. In the existing State-level VAT structure there are also certain short comings as follows. There are, for instance, even now, several taxes which are in the nature of indirect tax on goods and services, such as luxury tax, entertainment tax, etc., and yet not subsumed in the VAT. Moreover, in the present State-level VAT scheme, CENVAT load on the goods remains included in the value to be taxed under State VAT, and contributing to that extent a cascading effect on account of CENVAT element. This CENVAT load needs to be removed.
[...]
However, for this GST to be introduced at the State-level, it is essential that the States should be given the power of levy of taxation of all services. This power of levy of service taxes has so long been only with Centre. A Constitutional Amendment will be made for giving this power also to the States. Moreover, with the introduction of GST, burden of Central Sales Tax (CST) will also be removed. The GST at the State-level is, therefore, justified for (a) additional power of levy of taxation of services for the States, (b) system of comprehensive set-off relief, including set-off for cascading burden of CENVAT and services taxes, (c) subsuming of several taxes in the GST and (d) removal of burden for CST. Because of the removal of taxes in the GST, the burden of tax under GST on goods will, in general, fall.
23. Parliament introduced the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifteenth Amendment) Bill 201129 which sought to amend the provisions of the Constitution to introduce the GST regime. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha referred the 2011 Amendment Bill to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance. The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Second Amendment) Bill 201430 was introduced after incorporating the recommendations of the Standing Committee. The 2014 Amendment Bill was introduced to replace almost all the indirect taxes that were levied by the State Governments and the Union Government, with a singular tax system to eliminate the cascading effect of multiple taxes and to provide for acommon national market. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 2014 Amendment Bill reads as follows:
The Constitution is proposed to be amended to introduce the goods and services tax for conferring concurrent taxing powers on the Union as well as the States including Union territory with Legislature to make laws for levying goods and services tax on every transaction of supply of goods or services or both. The goods and services tax shall replace a number of indirect taxes being levied by the Union and the State Governments and is intended to remove cascading effect of taxes and provide for a common national market for goods and services. The proposed Central and State goods and services tax will be levied on all transactions involving supply of goods and services, except those which are kept out of the purview of the goods and services tax.
(emphasis supplied)
24. The Finance Minister while introducing the 2014 Amendment Bill in Parliament noted that the object of the constitutional amendment is to bring about a "certain amount of convergence between these taxes so that the taxation mechanism becomes extremely simple".31 He also highlighted the fact that there was no uniformity in the tax rates and structure across the States. The Statement of Objects and Reasons and the debates and speeches in the legislature indicate the intent behind the introduction of the Bill.32 The legislative history, the statement of objects and reasons of the Bill and the speech made when the bill was introduced indicate the mischief that Articles 246A and 279A to the Constitution sought to remedy, which is to simplify the indirect tax regime to prevent the complexities inherent in and the cascading effect of a multiplicity of taxes.
Simultaneous Legislative distribution
25. Article 246 read with the Seventh Schedule vests Parliament and the State Legislatures with the power to make laws on subject matters listed in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Before the introduction of Articles 246A and 279A by the Constitution Amendment Act 2016, the legislative powers of the Union and the States on taxation were exclusive. The general subjects of legislation constitute one group in the Union List (entries 1 to 81) and the State List (entries 1 to 44). The subject heads related to taxation are clubbed together in both the Union and the State lists (entries 82 to 92B in the Union list and entries 45 to 63 in the State list). The concurrent list does not include any entry related to taxation.33 For example, while the Union primarily has the power to impose income taxes, except from agriculture34, the State has the power to impose tax on agricultural income35. Therefore, both the Union and the States had a separate and an exclusive domain over specific heads of taxation. The Union and the State could not impose tax under the same head since the concurrent list did not include an entry for taxes. This Court, in its decision in Hoecst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Bihar MANU/SC/0392/1983 : (1983) 4 SCC 45, recognised the exclusive powers held by the Union and the State on taxation. The three-Judge Bench observed that:
75. Legislative relations between the Union and the States inter se with reference to the three Lists in Schedule VII cannot be understood fully without examining the general features disclosed by the entries contained in those Lists": Seervai in his Constitutional Law of India, 3rd Edn., Vol. 1 at pp. 81-82. A scrutiny of Lists I and II of the Seventh Schedulewould show that there is no overlapping anywhere in the taxing power and the Constitution gives independent sources of taxation to the Union and the States. Following the scheme of the Government of India Act, 1935, the Constitution has made the taxing power of the Union and of the States mutually exclusive and thus avoided the difficulties which have arisen in some other Federal Constitutions from overlapping powers of taxation.
76. It would therefore appear that there is a distinction made between general subjects of legislation and taxation. The general subjects of legislation are dealt with in one group of entries and power of taxation in a separate group. In M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. v. State of A.P. [MANU/SC/0151/1958 : AIR 1958 SC 468 : 1958 SCR 1422 : (1958) 9 STC 298] this Court dealt with the scheme of the separation of taxation powers between the Union and the States by mutually exclusive lists. In List I, Entries 1 to 81 deal with general subjects of legislation; Entries 82 to 92-A deal with taxes. In List II, Entries 1 to 44 deal with general subjects of legislation; Entries 45 to 63 deal with taxes. This mutual exclusiveness is also brought out by the fact that in List III, the Concurrent Legislative List, there is no entry relating to a tax, but it only contains an entry relating to levy of fees in respect of matters given in that list other than court-fees. Thus, in our Constitution, a conflict of the taxing power of the Union and of the States cannot arise. That being so, it is difficult to comprehend the submission that there can be intrusion by a law made by Parliament under Entry 33 of List III into a forbidden field viz. the State's exclusive power to make a law with respect to the levy and imposition of a tax on sale or purchase of goods relatable to Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule. It follows that the two laws viz. Sub-section (3) of Section 5 of the Act and para 21 of the Control Order issued by the Central Government under Sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, operate on two separate and distinct fields and both are capable of being obeyed. There is no question of any clash between the two laws and the question of repugnancy does not come into play.