MANU/SC/0065/1977
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 1486 of 1976
Decided On: 19.09.1977
Appellants:Union of India (UOI)
Vs.
Respondent:Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
N.L. Untwalia, P.N. Bhagwati, S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, V.R. Krishna Iyer and Y.V. Chandrachud, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: S.V. Gupte, R.P. Bhatt, Sr. Adv. R.N. Sachthey and Mrs. A. Subhashini, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: H.M. Seervai, Sr. Adv., B.R. Agarwala and Janendra Lal, Advs.
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 112, Constitution Of India - Article 112(3)(d)(iii), Constitution Of India - Article 113, Constitution Of India - Article 113(1), Constitution Of India - Article 113(3), Constitution Of India - Article 124, Constitution Of India - Article 124(2), Constitution Of India - Article 124(6), Constitution Of India - Article 127, Constitution Of India - Article 127(1), Constitution Of India - Article 132, Constitution Of India - Article 133(1), Constitution Of India - Article 141, Constitution Of India - Article 19(1)(g), Constitution Of India - Article 193(1), Constitution Of India - Article 202, Constitution Of India - Article 202(3)(d), Constitution Of India - Article 203, Constitution Of India - Article 203(1), Constitution Of India - Article 203(3)(d), Constitution Of India - Article 211, Constitution Of India - Article 214, Constitution Of India - Article 215, Constitution Of India - Article 216, Constitution Of India - Article 217, Constitution Of India - Article 217(1), Constitution Of India - Article 217(1)(c), Constitution Of India - Article 218, Constitution Of India - Article 219, Constitution Of India - Article 221, Constitution Of India - Article 221(1), Constitution Of India - Article 221(2), Constitution Of India - Article 222, Constitution Of India - Article 222(1), Constitution Of India - Article 224, Constitution Of India - Article 224A, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 229, Constitution Of India - Article 229(1), Constitution Of India - Article 233, Constitution Of India - Article 234, Constitution Of India - Article 235, Constitution Of India - Article 236, Constitution Of India - Article 237, Constitution Of India - Article 233(1), Constitution Of India - Article 233A, Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 50; Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 200, Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 220(2), Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 221, Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 222(2), Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 33(3)(d), Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 34(1), Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 40(1), Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 78(3)(d), Government Of India Act, 1935 [repealed] - Section 79(1); Prize Competitions Act 1955 - Section 4, Prize Competitions Act 1955 - Section 5
Relevant Section:
Constitution of India - Article 222
Cases Referred:
G. Narayanaswami vs. G. Pannerselvam and Ors. MANU/SC/0362/1972; M. Pentiah and Ors. vs. Muddala Veeramallappa and Ors. MANU/SC/0263/1960; The State of West Bengal vs. Nripendra Nath Bagchi MANU/SC/0310/1965; State of Assam and Anr. vs. Kuseswar Saikia and Ors. MANU/SC/0276/1969; State of Bihar vs. Madan Mohan Prasad and Ors. MANU/SC/0477/1975; State of Assam vs. Ranga Mahammad and Ors. MANU/SC/0056/1966; Ram Gopal Chaturvedi vs. State of Madhya Pradesh MANU/SC/0508/1969; The High Court of Punjab and Haryana and Ors. vs. The State of Haryana and Ors. MANU/SC/0072/1975; State of Haryana vs. Inder Prakash Anand H.C.S. and Ors. MANU/SC/0547/1976; Samsher Singh vs. State of Punjab and Anr. MANU/SC/0073/1974; R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs. The Union of India (UOI) MANU/SC/0020/1957; M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. vs. The State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr. MANU/SC/0151/1958; R. Pushpam and Anr. vs. The State of Madras, represented by the Secretary, Local Administration Department, Fort St. George, Madras and Anr. MANU/TN/0194/1953; Chandramouleshwar Prasad vs. The Patna High Court and Ors. MANU/SC/0495/1969; State of Orissa vs. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei and Ors. MANU/SC/0332/1967; A.K. Kraipak and Ors. vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0427/1969; State of Mysore vs. R.V. Bidap MANU/SC/0397/1973; Dattatraya Govind Mahajan and Ors. vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr. MANU/SC/0381/1977
Authorities Referred:
Halsbury's Laws of England, Third Edition, Volume 25
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated November 4, 1976 of the Gujarat High Court in Special Civil Application 911 of 1976--
Disposition:
Disposed of
Citing Reference:

Discussed
  32

Mentioned
  16

Case Note:
Constitution - Consent for transfer - Article 222, Clause (1) of Constitution of India - President had transferred a Judge of one High Court to another High Court - High Court had declared transfer order as illegal, invalid and ultra virus - Hence, this Appeal - Whether, a Judge of High Court could be transferred to another High Court by Central Government, under Article 222, Clause (1) of Constitution without his consent - Held, to transfer a judge without his consent could bring about devastating results and cause damage to tower of judiciary and erosion in its independence - However, consent of Judge concerned had to be taken, not so much as a constitutional necessity but as a matter of courtesy in view of high position that was held by him - However, parties settled matter between them - Therefore, an order disposing of Appeal in terms of settlement was passed - Appeal disposed of.
Ratio Decidendi:
"Consent of Judge concerned has to be taken, not so much as a constitutional necessity but as a matter of courtesy in view of high position that is held by him."
JUDGMENT
1. We have heard the learned Attorney-General and Mr. Seervai fully on the various points arising in this appeal. We will deal with the arguments of the learned Counsel later by a considered judgment or judgments. For the present we will only say that since we are informed that the parties to the appeal have arrived at a settlement, the appeal shall stand disposed of in terms of that settlement. Those terms are as follows:
On the facts and circumstances on record the present government do not consider that there was any justification for transferring Justice Sheth from Gujarat High Court and propose to transfer him back to that High Court.
On this statement being made by the learned Attorney-General, Mr. Seervai Counsel for respondent No. 1 (Justice S.H. Sheth) withdraws the writ petition with leave of the Court.
The following Opinions were delivered:
Chandrachud, J. This appeal by certificate involves the question as to the constitutionality of a notification issued by the President of India on May 27, 1976 which reads thus:
In exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (1) of Article 222 of the Constitution of India, the President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, is pleased to transfer Shri Justice Sankalchand Himatlal Sheth, Judge of the High Court of Gujarat, as Judge of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh with effect from the date he assumes charge of his office.
By a foot-note, Justice Sheth was "requested to take charge of his duties in the Andhra Pradesh High Court within four weeks from the date of issue" of the notification. The notification was issued by the Government of India in its Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, Department of Justice.
2. Mr. Sheth complied with the order of transfer and assumed charge of his office as a Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court but before doing so, he filed a writ petition, 911 of 1976, in the Gujarat High Court challenging the constitutional validity of the notification on the following grounds:
(i) The order was passed without his consent: such consent must be necessarily implied in Article 222(1) of the Constitution and therefore the transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another High Court without his consent is unconstitutional;
(ii) The order was passed in breach of the assurance given on behalf of the Government of India by the then Law Minister Shri A.K. Sen who, while moving the Constitution (15th Amendment) Act, 1963 said in the Lok Sabha that "so far as High Court Judges were concerned, they should not be transferred excepting by consent". Mr. Sheth having accepted judgeship of the Gujarat High Court on April 23, 1969 on the faith of the Law Minister's assurance, the Government of India was bound by that assurance on the doctrine of promissory estoppel;
(iii) The order of transfer mitigated against public interest. The power conferred by Article 222(1) was conditioned by the existence and requirement of public interest and since the impugned transfer was not shown to have been made in public interest, it was ultra vires; and
(iv) The order was passed without effective consultation with the Chief Justice of India. 'Consultation' in Article 222(1) means "effective consultation" and since the precondition of Article 222(1) that no transfer can be made without such consultation was not fulfilled, the order was bad and of no effect.
3. The Union of India was respondent 1 to the petition while Shri A.N. Ray, Chief Justice of India, or his successor-in-office was impleaded as respondent 2. The Union of India filed a counter-affidavit repudiating the factual allegations made by Mr. Sheth in his writ petition and disputing the validity of his legal contentions. The Chief Justice of India did not file any affidavit and beyond appearing through the Addl. Solicitor General, who also represented the Union Government, he took no part in the proceedings.
4. The writ petition was heard by a special Bench of three Judges, Justice J.B. Mehta, A.D. Desai and D.A. Desai. They unanimously rejected the challenge to the order of transfer on the ground of promissory estoppel. As regards the first ground, J.B. Mehta and D.A. Desai, JJ. held that the order was not void for want of Mr. Sheth's consent to his transfer. A.D. Desai J., however, took the view that the Judge of a High Court cannot be transferred without his consent. The third and fourth grounds were treated together by the learned Judges as two facets of the same contention and they held, unanimously, that there was no effective consultation with the Chief Justice of India. They arrived at this conclusion by different processes of reasoning into which it is unnecessary to go at this stage. J.B. Mehta J. voided the order of transfer on the ground that Mr. Sheth was "never consulted or informed of even the proposal of transfer as per the minimum requirement of natural justice and because it was not demonstrated. . . . by any material on record that there was effective consultation of the Chief Justice of India as required by the mandatory provision of Article 222(1)". A.D. Desai J. held that the order was unconstitutional because it was passed without Mr. Sheth's consent and secondly because it was passed "for a collateral purpose". The "discretionary power under Article 222(1)" was, according to the learned Judge, exercised "arbitrarily and unreasonably". D.A. Desai J. considered the matter by formulating these questions: "Is the power of the President under Article 222 unfettered ? What are the conditions for the exercise of such a discretionary power ? Have these conditions been fulfilled ? What is the scope and nature of consultation as envisaged by Article 222(1)?" Referring to the "mass transfers" of 16 Judges which were effected with "one stroke", though each Judge may have had peculiar personal difficulties to contend with and considering that the Union of India had failed to disclose the "nature and content of the consultation" with the Chief Justice of India, the learned Judge concluded that the consultation was not meaningful. He set aside the order observing, that "the head of the Judiciary does not appear to have taken into consideration all the relevant data when he was consulted and therefore, it is an inescapable conclusion ...that the transfer order for want of consultation as required by the Constitution is void".
5. The High Court has granted to the Union of India a certificate under Articles 132 and 133(1) of the Constitution to appeal to this Court. The Union Government has filed this appeal on the basis of that certificate, impleading Justice S.H. Sheth as respondent 1 and the Chief Justice of India as respondent 2.
6. During the hearing of the writ petition in the High Court, the Union of India raised an objection to the three particular Judges hearing the matter on the ground of bias. That objection was overruled by the Court and fortunately, the learned Attorney-General has spared us from having to consider that untenable contention by stating that he does not want to canvas it. Since Mr. Seervai, appearing on behalf of respondent 1, has not pressed the contention as regards promissory estoppel, it is unnecessary to examine that point also.
7. Mr. Seervai put the point of consent in the forefront and wove the brunt of his argument around it. Article 222(1) of the Constitution does not speak of consent. It provides:
The President may, after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other High Court.
But the learned Counsel contends that the power conferred by the article is, by necessary implication, subject to the precondition that the Judge who is proposed to be transferred must consent to his transfer. The fundamental basis underlying this contention is that judicial independence can be undermined by vesting the power of transferring a Judge in the executive and therefore, the transfer of High Court Judges from one High Court to another without their consent is calculated to undermine the independence of the High Court Judges. In order to uphold the independence of the judiciary, which is a basic feature of the Constitution, the Court has not only the power but it is its plain duty to read into Article 222(1) a limitation which is not to be found on the face of that article. This argument is elaborated thus:
(1) The transfer of a Judge, in many a case, inflicts personal injuries on him. For example, a Judge transferred from one High Court to another may have to maintain two establishments ; if his wife or unmarried daughter is gainfully employed, she may be required to give up the employment; the education of his children may suffer ; and above all, the transfer of a permanent Judge disables him from practicing not only in the High Court to which he was initially appointed but in the High Court or High Courts to which he may be subsequently transferred. To empower the executive to inflict these injuries on a Judge would gravely undermine the independence of the judiciary because, human nature being what it is, a large number of Judges would, consciously or unconsciously, be induced to fall in line with the wishes and policies of the executive government.
(2) It would be a surprising anomaly that the transfer of subordinate judges, as decided by the Supreme Court in several cases, should be exclusively within the control of the High Court in order to ensure that those judges are immune from the exercise of improper pressures by the executive, whereas High Court Judges themselves, for whose independence the Constitution has made copious and elaborate provisions, should be left to the mercy of the executive.
(3) The requirement of Article 222(1) that the President must consult the Chief Justice of India before transferring a Judge does not answer the problem because, even though consultation with the Chief Justice is not a matter of formality, the final world, in practice, always rests with the executive.
(4) Assuming that the President's power to transfer a High Court Judge would be reduced to a dead letter that power is made to depend upon the Judge's consent, if the choice lay between depriving numerous articles of the Constitution designed to secure the independence of the judiciary of their content and, on the other hand, depriving Article 222(1) of its practical effect, the second alternative ought to and must be preferred.
(5) The oath which a Judge of the High Court has to take, as prescribed by the Third Schedule, Clause VIII of the Constitution, that he will perform the duties of his office "without fear or favour", an expression which was absent in the form of the oath prescribed by Schedule IV to the Government of India Act, 1935, will not only become meaningless but will be impossible to fulfill unless it was placed out of the power of the legislature or the executive to secure favours from a Judge by putting him in fear of the injury which can easily be inflicted upon him by transferring him from one High Court to another.
(6) Even assuming that transfers of High Court Judges are necessary in the interests of national integration, it cannot be ignored that independence of the High Court Judges is the highest public interest, particularly in a federal or quasi-federal Constitution like ours and if there is a conflict of interest, the high principle of the independence of the judiciary must prevail over the amorphous concept of national integration.
(7) The transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another is, subject to incidents like continuity of service, in the nature of a fresh appointment to the other Court. Since a person cannot be appointed to a post without his consent, Article 222(1) should be read as if it contains the words "with his consent" after the words "transfer a Judge" and before the words "from one High Court to any other High Court". In other words, "transfer", within the meaning of Article 222(1) means a consensual, not a compulsive shifting of a Judge from one High Court to another.
(8) It is of the essence of judicial service that there is no master-and-servant relationship between a Judge and the Government. The Judge cannot be asked by the Government to decide a case in any particular way. Even the higher Court, generally only corrects the Judge of the lower court-it does not command him. Therefore, "transfer" in Article 222(1) does not have the same colour or content as in other services. The concept of 'transfer' under that article is totally different, a concept which must be construed harmoniously with the various constitutional provisions which are enacted in order to secure judicial independence. A non-consensual transfer will provide the executive with a potent weapon to punish the Judge who does not toe its line and thereby destroy the independence of the judiciary.
(9) Of no word can one say that it is clear and unambiguous unless one reads the whole document in which that word occurs. "Transfer", in the context of the entire constitutional scheme becomes a word of doubtful import. If a vital constitutional principle is going to be violated by putting a wider construction on that expression, it must receive a narrow, restricted meaning ; and lastly,
(10) Such a narrow interpretation will not deprive the article of its practical efficacy or reduce it to dead letter because, as a matter of fact, nearly 25 Judges were transferred with their consent since the inception of the Constitution. It was only during the emergency, when every safeguard of liberty had gone, that mass transfer of High Court Judges were resorted to by the executive on grounds unconnected with the requirements of public interest.
8. The learned Attorney-General does not dispute that the greatest care ought to be taken to preserve the independence of the judiciary which the Constitution so copiously protects. Nor does he join issue on the question of hardship which a transfer ordinarily entails. He, however, contends that the word 'transfer which occurs in Article 222(1) is not an expression of ambiguous import, that there is no justification for reading the precondition of 'consent' in the article which is not to be found therein and that, even assuming for the purposes of argument that a Judge has to take a fresh oath before taking office in the High Court to which he is transferred, 'transfer' does not involve a fresh appointment. Therefore, it is not necessary to obtain the consent of the Judge to his transfer from one High Court to another. On the question of consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Attorney-General did not labour at any length. Indeed, Mr. Seervai himself did not expatiate on that question. The drift of the Union's submission is that consultation with the Chief Justice can be an adequate safeguard against arbitrary transfers. We will have to consider carefully the question as to what the term 'consultation' comprehends, in order that such a safeguard may be real and effective.
9. I will deal first with Mr. Seervai's contention that on a true construction of Article 222(1) of the Constitution, a Judge of a High Court cannot be transferred without his consent. Since Article 222(1) does not provide that such consent is necessary, the argument raises the question whether one can still read into that article words which are not to be found in it. Statutory interpretation, with conflicting rules pulling in different directions, has become a murky area and just as a case-law digest can supply an authority on almost any thinkable proposition, so the new editions of old classics have collected over the years formulas which can fit in with any interpretation which one may choose to place. Perplexed by a bewildering mass of irreconcilable dogmas, courts have adopted and applied to cases which come before them rules which reflect their own value judgments, making it increasingly difficult to define with precision the extent to which one may look beyond the actual words used by the legislature, for discovering the true legislative purpose or intent. "Traditional overemphasis on the literal aspects of meaning has provoked today's reactionary under emphasis on them", says Reed Dickerson in his innovative work on "The Interpretation and Application of Statutes", but "A wholesome resistance to the excesses of literalism need not exaggerate the uncertainties of language nor distort the proper role or range of judicial discretion." (pag 4).
10. In the United States of America, Judges like George Sutherland and Hugo Black have made fervent pleas that the Court must read the constitutional clauses literally. In Home Building and Loan Association v. Blaisdell, 78 L.Ed. 413 (1934). Justice Sutherland in his dissenting opinion said that "If the provisions of the Constitution be not upheld when they pinch as well as when they comfort, they may as well be abandoned." In Griswold v. Connecticut 14 L.Ed.2d 510, Justice Black, also in a dissent, said that "one of the most effective ways of diluting or expanding a constitutionally guaranteed right is to substitute for the crucial word or words of a constitutional guarantee another word or words more or less flexible and more or less restricted in meaning." Other Judges like Benjamin Cardozo have said that one draws precise meaning from a document as vaguely worded as the Constitution only by first reading values into its clauses. And by a famous formulation, Justice Frankfurter said in Massachusetts S. Insurance Co. v. U.S. (1956) 352 U.S. 128, that "there is no surer way to misread a document than to read it literally." But this is not to be taken too literally. 'The hard truth of the matter is that American Courts have no intelligible, generally accepted and consistently applied theory of statutory interpretation."
11. The normal rule of interpretation is that the words used by the legislature are generally a safe-guide to its intention. Lord Reid in Westminster Bank Ltd. v. Zang (1966) A.C. 182, observed that "no principle of interpretation of statutes is more firmly settled than the rule that the Court must deduce the intention of Parliament from the words used in the Act." Applying such a rule, this Court observed in S. Narayanaswami v. G. Panneerselyam, MANU/SC/0362/1972 : [1973]1SCR172 that "where the statute's meaning is clear and explicit, words cannot be interpolated." What is true of the interpretation of an ordinary statute is not any the less true in the case of a constitutional provision and the same rule applies equally to both. But if the words of an instrument are ambiguous in the sense that they can reasonably bear more than one meaning, that is to say, if the words are semantically ambiguous, or if a provision, if read literally, is patently incompatible with the other provisions of that instrument, the court would be justified in construing the words in a manner which will make the particular provision purposeful. That, in essence is the rule of harmonious construction. In M. Pentiah v. Veeramallappa, MANU/SC/0263/1960 : [1961]2SCR295 this Court observed:
Where the language of a statute, in its ordinary meaning and grammatical construction leads to a manifest contradiction of the apparent purpose of the enactment, or to some inconvenience or absurdity, hardship or injustice presumably not intended, a construction may be put upon it which modifies the meaning of the words and even the structure of the sentence. . . .