MANU/SC/0021/2010
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 484-491 of 2006, Civil Appeal No. 209 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 21123 of 2005), Civil Appeal Nos. 210-211 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 21124-25 of 2005), Civil Appeal No. 212 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 21129 of 2005), Civil Appeal No. 213 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 21131 of 2005), Civil Appeal No. 214 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23887 of 2005), Civil Appeal No. 215 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 2535 of 2006), Civil Appeal No. 216 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 3274 of 2006) and Civil Appeal No. 217 of 2010 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6325 of 2008)
Decided On: 12.01.2010
Appellants: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Rakesh Kumar and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
K.G. Balakrishnan, C.J., P. Sathasivam and J.M. Panchal, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: Gopal Subramanium, ASG, Rajeev Dhawan, (N.P.), P.S. Mishra (N.P.), S.B. Upadhyay (N.P.), M.N. Krishnamani (N.P.) and Nagendra Rai (N.P.), Sr. Advs., Tapesh Kumar Singh and Balaji, Advs. for B. Krishna Prasad, Adv., Amlan Kumar Ghosh, Prashant Bhushan, Bhupender Yadav, Vikramjit Banerjee, R.C. Kohli, Saket Singh, Niranjana Singh, Vikram, Braj Kishore Mishra, T.T.K. Deepak and Co., (NP), Nikhil Nayyar, T.V.S. Raghavendra Sreyas, Sumeet Gagodra, Amboj Agrawal, M.P. Raju, Mary Scaria, P. George Giri, Y. Kalivi Zhimomi, Ashwani Bhardwaj, Santosh Mishra, Rajesh Ranjan Dubey, Dhruv Kumar Jha, Jayesh Gaurav, Shiv Mangal Sharma, Upendra Mishra, Pawan Upadhyay, Sharmila Upadhyay, Chinmoy Khaladkar, Shailendra Narayan Singh, Neelam Kalsi, Vimal Chandra S. Dave, Sanjay R. Hegde, Anil Kumar Mishra, A. Rohen Singh, Amit Kumar Chawla, Vikrant Yadav, R. Venkataramani, Manish Kumar Saran, Nirmal Kumar Ambastha, Delip Jerath, Ruchira Gupta and Bhawesh Kumar, Advs. for Ashok Mathur, Adv., Kumud Lata Das, D.N. Goburdhan, (NP) and Ajit Kumar Sinha, (NP), Advs
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
p>Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 14, Constitution Of India - Article 15(4), Constitution Of India - Article 16, Constitution Of India - Article 16(4), Constitution Of India - Article 243-D(4), Constitution Of India - Article 243-M(4)(b), Constitution Of India - Article 243B, Constitution Of India - Article 243C, Constitution Of India - Article 243D, Constitution Of India - Article 243D(1), Constitution Of India - Article 243D(6), Constitution Of India - Article 243M, Constitution Of India - Article 243M(1), Constitution Of India - Article 243M(4)(b), Constitution Of India - Article 243M(6), Constitution Of India - Article 244, Constitution Of India - Article 334, Constitution Of India - Article 39, Constitution Of India - Article 40
Relevant Section:
Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 - Section 4; Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001 - Section 21(B); JHARKHAND PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 2001 - Section 17(B)(2), JHARKHAND PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 2001 - Section 21(B)
Cases Referred:
Janardhan Paswan v. State of Bihar MANU/BH/0007/1988 : AIR 1988 Pat 75; Indra Sawhney v. Union of India MANU/SC/0104/1993 : (1992) Supp. (3) SCC 217; M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore MANU/SC/0080/1962 : (1963) 1 SCC 439 : AIR 1963 SC 649; R.C. Poudyal v. Union of India MANU/SC/0292/1993 : (1994) Supp. 1 SCC 324; Krishna Kumar Mishra v. State of Bihar MANU/BH/0019/1996 : AIR 1996 Pat. 112; Vinayakrao Gangaramji Deshmukh v. P.C. Agrawal and Ors. MANU/MH/0698/1998 : AIR 1999 Bom 142; Ashok Kumar Tripathi v. Union of India MANU/MP/0363/1999 : 2000 (2) MPHT 193; N.P. Ponnuswami's case MANU/SC/0049/1952 : AIR 1952 SC 64
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order Dated 02.09.2005 of the High Court of Jharkhand in W.P. (PIL) No. 2728 of 2002, W.P. (PIL) No. 3877/2002, W.P. (PIL) No. 747/2001, W.P. (PIL) No. 1585 of 2002, W.P. (PIL) No. 849 of 2002, CWJC No. 3591/1997 ®, CWJC No. 2148 of 2001, W.P. © No. 2097 of 2002
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  6

Mentioned
  2

Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
Case Note:
Constitution - Validity of Provision - Sections 21 (B), 40(B) and 55(B) of Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001, Article 243M(4)(b) of Constitution of India and Section 4(2)(g) of Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 - Present appeal filed against order whereby High Court hold that provisions Section 4(2)(g) of Act, 1996 and Sections 21 (B), 40(B) and 55(B) of Act, 2001 declared unconstitutional - Held, High Court had erred in striking down Sections 21(B), 40(B) and 55(B) of Act,2001 which give effect to Section 4(2)(g) of Act, 1996 - Panchayats located in Scheduled Areas, exclusive representation of Scheduled Tribes in Chairperson positions of same bodies is constitutionally permissible - Because Article 243M(4)(b) of Constitution expressly empowers Parliament to provide for 'exceptions and modifications' in application of Part IX to Scheduled Areas - Provisos of Act, 1996 contemplate certain exceptions to norm of proportionate representation and same exceptional treatment was incorporated in impugned provisions of Act, 2001 - Identification of Scheduled Areas is done on basis of census data and same is collected after intervals of 10 years - Data indicates that while Scheduled Tribes are indeed in majority in some Scheduled Areas, same is not true for some other Scheduled Areas - Court must re-emphasize Committee's recommendation that persons belonging to Scheduled Tribes should occupy at least half of seats in Panchayats located in Scheduled Areas, irrespective of whether ST population was in relative minority in concerned area - This recommendation is in line with larger objective of safeguarding interests of Scheduled Tribes - Hence, appeals allowed and Section 4(g)(2) of Act, 1996 and Sections 21(B), 40(B) and 55(B) of Act, 2001 are held to be constitutionally valid
JUDGMENT
K.G. Balakrishnan, C.J.
1. Leave granted.
2. For a considerable period during the British Rule, special laws were made applicable to certain 'backward areas' in India that were predominantly occupied by tribal people. These backward regions covered an area of more than 1,20,000 square miles. However, the characteristics of these areas and their populations varied widely. By Act XIV of 1874, Santhal Parganas and Chutia Nagpur Division (now known as Chhotanagpur Division) were created and in these 'Scheduled districts', tribal communities were accorded a certain degree of autonomy to regulate their affairs on the basis of their own conventions and traditions. Many of these communities chose their leaders through an informal consensus among other customary methods for selection. When the Constitution was enacted, these areas were designated as 'Scheduled Areas'. Article 244 of the Constitution explicitly states that the provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply in respect of the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas in any State other than the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. The provisions of the Sixth Schedule guide the administration of tribal areas in those states.
3. Paragraph (4) of the Fifth Schedule states that there shall be in each State having a "Schedule Area", a 'Tribes Advisory Council' consisting of not more than twenty members of whom, as nearly as may be, three- fourths shall be the representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State. It was the duty of the 'Tribes Advisory Council' to advise on matters pertaining to the welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes in the State. Paragraph (5) of the Fifth Schedule states that the Governor of the State may by public notification direct that any particular Act of Parliament or the Legislature of the State shall not apply to a Scheduled Area or would apply subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify. The Governor of the State may also make regulations for the peace and good government of any area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area. The Governor of the State has also been given the power to repeal or amend any existing Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State which is for the time being applicable to the area in question.
4. Hence, it is evident that the framers' intent behind including the Fifth Schedule was that of a separate administrative scheme for Scheduled Areas in order to address the special needs of tribal communities. During the debates on the floor of the Constituent Assembly, some members had criticized such differential treatment for Scheduled Tribes. In response to such criticisms, Shri K.M. Munshi had said that 'Adivasis' or tribes were many in number belonging to different "ethnic, religious and social groups" and he explained the object of the Drafting Committee's proposals in the following words:
We want that the Scheduled Tribes in the whole country should be protected from the destructive impact of races possessing a higher and more aggressive culture and should be encouraged to develop their own autonomous life; at the same time we want them to take a larger part in the life of the country adopted. They should not be isolated communities or little republics to be perpetuated for ever...object is to maintain them as little unconnected communities which might develop into different groups from the rest of the country... and that these tribes should be absorbed in the national life of the country.
5. In exercise of the powers conferred by paragraph 6(i) of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution of India, the President of India made an Order known as The Scheduled Area (Part A States) Order, 1950. With respect to the then combined State of Bihar, this Order was applied to Ranchi district, Singhbhum district (excluding Dalbhum sub-division) and Santhal Pargana district. The following table shows the chronology of the governmental measures which have identified Scheduled Areas in the territories that lie in the present-day State of Jharkhand:
Hence, Tribes Advisory Councils had been constituted for these Scheduled areas since the Panchayati Raj System had not been extended to them.
6. By way of the Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992, Part IX was inserted in the Constitution of India. Article 243B of Part IX of the Constitution mandated that there shall be Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels in accordance with the provisions of this Part. Article 243C provides that the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the composition of Panchayats. Detailed provisions were made under Article 243D enabling the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, women and other backward classes. Article 243M stated that nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in Clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in Clause (2), of Article 244.
7. Two years after the 73rd Amendment Act, the Union Government had appointed a Committee of Members of Parliament (MPs) and experts under the Chairmanship of Sh. Dilip Singh Bhuria to undertake a detailed study and make recommendations about whether the Panchayati raj system should be extended to the Schedules Areas, as contemplated by Article 243M(4)(b) of the Constitution. The Committee submitted its report on 17.1.1995 and favoured democratic decentralization in scheduled areas. It will be instructive to refer to the following observations in the Bhuria Committee Report (at Para. 10):
Tribal life and economy, in the not too distant past, bore a harmonious relationship with nature and its endowment. It was an example of sustainable development. But with the influx of outside population, it suffered grievous blows. The colonial system was established on the basis of expropriation of the natural and economic resources of tribal and other areas in the country. Although, theoretically, there has been difference in the approach after the departure of the colonial masters from Tribal areas, in practice, the principles enunciated in Article 39 and other Directive Principles of State Policy have to be followed more rigorously. On account of their simplicity and ignorance, over the decades the tribals have been dispossessed of their natural and economic resources like land, forest, water, air, etc.. The dispossession has not been confined to that through private parties. For the purpose of promotion of general economic development projects, the State also has been depriving them of the basis means of livelihood. These processes have been operative since a long time causing human misery and socio-economic damage. No reliable picture is yet available, for instance, we are not seized on the total quantum of land alienated from the tribals both on private and State account nor the number of families, clans or Tribes involved. This has compelled some to perceive development as an agent of destruction. But since planned development has been an article of faith with us, it has to be ensured that implementation of the policies and programmes drawn up in tribal interest are implemented in tribal interest. Since, by and large, the politico-bureaucratic apparatus has failed in its endeavor, powers should be developed on the people so that they can formulate programmed which suit them and implement them for their own benefits.
It was further observed, at Para. 30:
The group was further of the view that notwithstanding the fact that the areas under consideration i.e. Scheduled Areas are expected to have majority of tribal population, it is necessary to stipulate that the Panchayats therein will have a majority of Scheduled Tribes members. The reason is that the Scheduled Areas were notified as such on account of majority of Scheduled Tribe population, contiguity etc. In course of time, on account of influx of non-ST population, in a few Scheduled Areas, the status of the ST population might have been reduced to a minority. That should not be regarded as having altered the overall character of the Scheduled Areas. The chairmen and vice-chairmen should belong to the Scheduled Tribes. One-third of the seats should be reserved for women.
(Emphasis supplied)
8. Evidently, the Committee made three specific recommendations, namely, (a) Panchayats in scheduled areas must have a majority of scheduled tribes members, (b) Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen should belong to scheduled tribes, and (c) one-third of the seats should be reserved for women. The Committee felt that certain provisions in Part IX which pertained to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) were wholesome and should be incorporated in the law to be passed by the Parliament under Article 243M(4)(b) with due regard for the unique characteristics of tribal societies residing in the Scheduled Areas. It was considered especially important to protect the interests of many tribal societies which have their own customary laws, traditional practices and community ethos. The Committee was also of the view that since the Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas are expected to have a majority of tribal population, the Panchayats at different tiers should have a majority of members who belong to the Scheduled Tribes (Hereinafter 'STs'). Furthermore, it was suggested that both the chairman and vice- chairman should belong to this category as well. The Committee also made recommendations in respect of the various functions to be discharged by the Gram Sabhas in Tribal areas. They pertained to safeguards for the rights of the tribal communities in matters relating to land, water, forest and minor forest produce; enforcement of customary rights such as grazing, fuel, fodder, minor forest produce, building materials; mobilization for community welfare programmes and organising voluntary labour for community works; promotion of solidarity and harmony among all sections of people; consideration of the report on the audit of accounts of the Gram Panchayat; women and child development; identification of the beneficiaries for poverty alleviation and other programmes and host of other welfare measures such as drinking water supply, sanitation, conservancy and drainage; public health measures; village roads and streets; small tanks; maintenance of public properties and community assets. The Committee gave detailed suggestions with regard to the powers, functions and procedures of the Panchayati Raj Institutions.
9. Based on these recommendations, The Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 [hereinafter 'PESA'] was passed by the Parliament in 1996. The statement of Objects and Reasons of the PESA Act reads as follows:
There have been persistent demands from prominent leaders of the Scheduled Areas for extending the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution to these Areas so that Panchayat Raj Institutions may be established there. Accordingly, it is proposed to introduce a Bill to provide for the extension of the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution to the Schedule Areas with certain modifications providing that, among other things, the State Legislations that may be made shall be in consonance with the customary law, social and religious practices and traditional management practices of community resources; .... The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at all levels shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes; the reservations of seats at every Panchayat for the Scheduled Tribes shall not be less than one-third of the total number of seats.
10. The provision of the PESA Act which merits consideration in the present case is Section 4 which reads as follows:
4. Notwithstanding anything contained under Part IX of the Constitution, the Legislature of a State shall not make any law under that Part which is inconsistent with any of the following features, namely:--
(a) a State legislation on the Panchayats that may be made shall be in consonance with the customary law, social and religious practices and traditional management practices of community resources;
(b) a village shall ordinarily consist of a habitation or a group of habitations or a hamlet or a group of hamlets comprising a community and managing its affairs in accordance with traditions and customs;
(c) every village shall have a Gram Sabha consisting of persons whose names are included in the electoral rolls for the Panchayat at the village level;
(d) every Gram Sabha shall be competent to safeguard and preserve the traditions and customs of the people, their cultural identity, community resources and the customary mode of dispute resolution;
(e) every Gram Sabha shall -
(i) approve the plans, programmes and projects for social and economic development before such plans, programmes and projects are taken up for implementation by the Panchayat at the village level;
(ii) be responsible for the identification or selection of persons as beneficiaries under the poverty alleviation and other programmes;
(f) every Panchayat at the village level shall be required to obtain from the Gram Sabha a certification of utilization of funds by that Panchayat for the plans, programmes and projects referred to in Clause (e);
(g) the reservation of seats in the Scheduled Areas at every Panchayat shall be in proportion to the population of the communities in that Panchayat for whom reservation is sought to be given under Part IX of the Constitution;
Provided that the reservation for the Scheduled Tribes shall not be less than one-half of the total number of seats:
Provided further that all seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes;
(h) the State Government may nominate persons belonging to such Schedule Tribes as have no representation in the Panchayat at the intermediate level or the Panchayat at the district level:
Provided that such nomination shall not exceed one-tenth of the total members to be elected in that Panchayat;
(i) the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be consulted before making the acquisition of land in the Scheduled Areas for development projects and before re-settling or rehabilitating persons affected by such projects in the Scheduled Areas; the actual planning and implementation of the projects in the Scheduled Areas shall be coordinated at the State level;
(j) planning and management of minor water bodies in the Scheduled Areas shall be entrusted to Panchayats at the appropriate level;
(k) the recommendations of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be made mandatory prior to grant of prospecting licence or mining lease for minor minerals in the Scheduled Areas:
(l) the prior recommendation of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be made mandatory for grant of concession for the exploitation of minor minerals by auction;
(m) while endowing Panchayats in the Scheduled Areas with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self- government, a State Legislature shall ensure that the Panchayats at the appropriate level and the Gram Sabha are endowed specifically with -
(i) the power to enforce prohibition or to regulate or restrict the sale and consumption of any intoxicant;
(ii) the ownership of minor forest produce;
(iii) the power to prevent alienation of land in the Scheduled Areas and to take appropriate action to restore any unlawfully alienated land of a Scheduled Tribe;
(iv) the power to manage village markets by whatever name called;
(v) the power to exercise control over money lending to the Scheduled Tribes;
(vi) the power to exercise control over institutions and functionaries in all social sectors;
(vii) the power to control over local plans and resources for such plans including tribal sub- plans;
(n) the State legislations that may endow Panchayats with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions or self-government shall contain safeguards to ensure that Panchayats at the higher level do not assume the powers and authority of any Panchayat at the lower level or of the Gram Sabha;
(o) the State Legislature shall endeavour to follow the pattern of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution while designing the administrative arrangements in the Panchayats at district levels in the Scheduled Areas.
[emphasis supplied]
11. To give effect to the provisions of PESA Act, the State Legislature of Jharkhand had passed the Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001 [Hereinafter 'JPRA'] which included the following provisions:
Section 17(B). Reservation of seats in Gram Panchayat.-
(B) For the members of the Gram Panchayat (in Scheduled Area). -
(1) In scheduled areas, in every Gram Panchayat, reservation of seats in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be made, proportionate to their respective population in that Gram Panchayat:
Provided that the seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes shall not be less than half of the total number.
(2) In the scheduled areas, in Gram Panchayat, seats shall be reserved in such number in favour of persons of backward class, proportionate to their population, which, if combined with the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled tribes, if any, shall not exceed more than Eighty per cent of total seats of that Gram Panchayat.
Section 21(B) - Reservation of Posts of Mukhia and Up-Mukhia in Gram Panchayat (In Scheduled area)-
Post of Mukhia and Up-Mukhia of the Gram Panchayats in the scheduled areas shall be reserved for the scheduled tribes;
Provided also that the Gram Panchayats, in the scheduled areas, wherein there is no population of scheduled tribes, shall be duly excluded from allotment of reserved posts of Mukhia and Up-Mukhia of scheduled tribes.
Section 36(B)-Reservation of seats of Panchayat Samiti (in Schedule Area)-
(1) In scheduled areas, in every Panchayat Samiti, reservation of seats in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be made, proportionate to their respective population in that Panchayat Samiti:
Provided that the seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes shall not be less than half of the total number.
(2) In the scheduled areas, in Panchayat Samiti, seats shall be reserved in such number in favour of persons of backward class, proportionate to their population, which, if combined with the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled tribes, if any, shall not exceed more than Eighty per cent of total seats of that Panchayat Samiti.
...
Section 40(B) - Reservation of Posts of Pramukh and Up-Pramukh in Panchayat Samiti (In the scheduled area)-
Posts of Pramukh and Up-Pramukh in Panchayat Samitis in the scheduled areas shall be reserved for the members belonging to the scheduled tribes.
Section 51(B). Reservation of seats of Zila Parishad (in Scheduled Area)-
(1) In scheduled areas, in every Zila Parishad, reservation of seats in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be made, proportionate to their respective population in that Zila Parishad:
Provided that the seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes shall not be less than half of the total number.
(2) In the scheduled areas, in Zila Parishad, seats shall be reserved in such number in favour of persons of backward class, proportionate to their population, which, if combined with the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled tribes, if any, shall not exceed more than Eighty per cent of total seats of that Zila Parishad.
Section 55(B) - Reservation for Posts of Adhyaksha and Upadhakshya in Zila Parishad (In scheduled area)-
The post of Adhyaksha and Zila Parishads in scheduled areas shall be reserved for the members of the scheduled tribes.
12. In the High Court of Jharkhand, several writ petitions were filed to challenge the constitutional validity of the PESA Act, 1996 and certain other provisions of the Jharkhand Panchayati Raj Act, 2001. With regard to the PESA, the main challenge was directed against the second proviso to Section 4(g) whereby all the seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all three tiers in Scheduled Areas are to be reserved in favour of Scheduled Tribes. The petitioners before the High Court had contended that since every eligible individual has a right to vote and the right to contest elections for the seats and Chairperson positions in panchayats, the cent per cent reservation of Chairperson positions in favour of STs would curtail the rights of candidates other than those belonging to the ST category.
13. It was also argued that the cent per cent reservation of Chairperson positions was excessive and hence violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. Some of the petitioners had urged that the office of a Chairperson should be treated as a solitary post and hence reservation of such office was not permissible. In support of this contention, they had relied on an earlier Judgment of the Patna High Court in the case of Janardhan Paswan v. State of Bihar MANU/BH/0007/1988 : AIR 1988 Pat 75. This case was distinguished by the High Court keeping in mind that it was decided before the commencement of the Seventy-Third Amendment and that Article 243D in Part IX of the Constitution had contemplated the said reservation policy. However, the High Court held that the second proviso to Section 4(g) of the PESA Act, 1996 reserving all the seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats in favour of Scheduled Tribes was unconstitutional. The relevant portion of the High Court Judgment reads as follows:
...So far as 2nd proviso to Clause (g) of Section 4 of PESA Act, 1996 is concerned, by such provision of the seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels in the scheduled areas have been reserved for the Scheduled Tribes. In view of the aforesaid proviso to Clause (g) of Section 4 of PESA Act, 1996, the State Government while enacted Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001 in regard to the scheduled areas, all seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels have been reserved for Scheduled Tribes vide Section 21(B), Section 40(B) and Section 55(B) of the Act, 2001. It has already been held that cent-percent reservation of the offices and seats of Chairpersons cannot be made, being excessive, unreasonable and against the principles of equality i.e. violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. By the aforesaid provisions cent-percent reservation of seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels in scheduled areas having been made, they cannot be upheld, being unconstitutional. Accordingly, the 2nd proviso to Clause (g) of Section 4 of PESA Act, 1996, Section 21 (B), Section 40(B) and Section 55(B) of Jharkhand Panchayat Raj Act, 2001 so far cent percent reservation of seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels in favour of Scheduled Tribes is concerned, are hereby declared unconstitutional and ultra-vires.