MANU/SC/1761/2019
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 9488-9489 of 2019 (Arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 5581-5582 of 2019)
Decided On: 17.12.2019
Appellants: University of Delhi
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
R. Banumathi, A.S. Bopanna and Hrishikesh Roy, JJ.
Subject: Limitation
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order XXI; Delhi University Act, 1922 - Section 21; Indian Limitation Act, 1963 - Section 5; Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
Cases Referred:
Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag and Anr. v. Mst. Katiji and Ors. MANU/SC/0460/1987; M/s. Dehri Rohtas Light Railway Company Limited v. District Board, Bhojpur and others and District Board, Shahabad and others MANU/SC/0110/1993; Adil Singh v. Union of India MANU/DE/2082/2010 : (2010) 171 DLT 748; Postmaster General and Ors. v. Living Media India Limited and Anr. 1992 (3) SCC 563
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  2

Mentioned
  2

Case Note:
Limitation - Condonation of delay - Denial of - Writ petition was filed in High Court by Appellant against decision of Delhi Development Authority who had allowed Respondent No. 13 to construct high-rise multistory group housing society in control zone of Zone-C in University campus, without any height restriction - Single Judge having noticed entire sequence refused to entertain writ petition on ground of delay and laches - Appellant prefer intra-Court Appeal in High Court with application for condonation of delay in filing appeal - High Court declined to condone delay in filing appeal - Hence, present appeal - Whether delay in filing appeal against order of Single Judge liable to be condoned.

Facts:

The Appellant filed writ petition against decision of the Delhi Development Authority who had allowed Respondent No. 13 to construct a high-rise multistory group housing society in the control zone of Zone-C in the University campus, without any height restriction. The Single Judge having noticed the entire sequence refused to entertain the writ petition on the ground of delay and laches. The Appellant o prefer an intra-Court Appeal in the High Court with application for condonation of delay in filing appeal. The High Court declined to condone the delay in filing the appeal.

Held, while dismissing the appeal:

(i) The delay in the instant facts in filing the appeal was nine hundred sixty days and as such the consideration to condone can be made only if there is reasonable explanation and the condonation could not be merely because the Appellant is public body. The entire explanation noticed above, depicts the casual approach unmindful of the law of limitation despite being aware of the position of law. That apart when there was such a long delay and there was no proper explanation, laches would also come into play while noticing as to the manner in which a party had proceeded before filing an appeal. In addition in the instant facts not only the delay and laches in filing the appeal is contended on behalf of the Respondents seeking dismissal of the instant appeal but it was also contended that there was delay and laches in filing the writ petition itself at the first instance from which the present appeal had arisen. In that view, it would be necessary to advert to those aspects of the matter and notice the nature of consideration made in the writ petition as well as the letter patent appeal to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the High Court was justified. [21]

(ii) The entire explanation for the inordinate delay was twofold, i.e. the non-availability of the Vice-Chancellor due to retirement and subsequent appointment of new Vice-Chancellor, also that the matter was placed before the Executive Council and a decision was taken to file the appeal and the said process had caused the delay. The reasons as stated did not appear very convincing since the situation was of availing the appellate remedy and not the original proceedings requiring such deliberation when it was a mere continuation of the proceedings which had already been filed on behalf of the Appellant herein, after due deliberation. Significantly, the Vice-Chancellor who was at the helm of affairs when the writ petition was filed, prosecuted and disposed of was available in the same office, for about six months which was a long enough period as compared to thirty days limitation period for filing appeal. In that circumstance when the said Vice-Chancellor who had prosecuted the writ petition was available, the submission of the Appellant that unseen hands are likely to have prevented the filing of the appeal also could not be accepted. Secondly, the reason sought to be put forth about the decision required to be taken by the Executive Council was also not acceptable when it was just the matter of filing the appeal. In fact, in the writ petition an affidavit was filed referring to Resolution of Academic Council and Executive Council authorising for filing writ petition. When the writ petition was filed based on such authorisation and the stand of the Appellant, as the writ Petitioner was put forth and had failed in the writ petition, it could not be accepted that the Appellant with all the wherewithal was unable to file the appeal, that too when the same Vice-Chancellor was available for six months after dismissal of the writ petition. Hence the reasons put forth could not constitute sufficient cause. [22]

(iii) Therefore, taking into consideration all these aspects of the matter, not only the learned Single Judge was justified in holding that the writ petition inter alia was hit by delay and laches but the decision of the Division Bench in dismissing the appeal on the ground of delay was also justified and the orders did not call for interference. [29]

Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Industry: Education
JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. These appeals have been preferred by the Appellant-University of Delhi through its Registrar to challenge the common judgment and order dated 29.10.2018 whereby, the High Court of Delhi declined to condone the delay of 916 days in filing the appeal to challenge the judgment dated 27.04.2015 whereunder, the learned Single Judge had dismissed the W.P. (C) No. 2743/2012 filed by the University of Delhi.
3. The challenge in the writ petition was, inter alia, to the decision dated 12.5.2011 of the Delhi Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the, "DDA" for short) who had allowed Respondent No. 13- M/s. Young Builders (P) Ltd. to construct a high-rise multistory group housing society in the control zone of Zone-C in the University campus, without any height restriction. The construction permission was allowed on the plot leased out to the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the, "DMRC" for short) by permitting segregation of 2 hectares as a separate entity from the total 3 hectares of land, acquired for the metro station.
4. The principal contentions of the Appellant-University on the merits of the challenge were as follows:
a) the permission sought by Respondent No. 13 (namely, M/s. Young Builders Private Limited) for the proposed construction of a group housing society on the land originally owned by the Ministry of Defence in the University enclave is violative of the MPD-2021 and is against the larger public interest, given the fact that the project site in question and its vicinity are within the North Campus of the University and that it contains various historical and archaeological buildings, apart from it being the centre of higher education and advanced learning; and
b) the change in the character of the subject land is impermissible in law, since the land having been acquired for public purpose for construction of the metro rail project, has suddenly been diverted to private commercial use and auctioned to private builder for building a group housing society in a manner contrary to the purpose and charter of incorporation of the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
c) The restriction on certain developments for Metro Station prescribed under Master Plan of Delhi - 2021 ('MPD' for short) was also a contention raised by the writ Petitioner which imposed ban on construction of high-rise buildings in the control zone of the Delhi University. The location of various ladies' hostels of the University in close vicinity of the proposed construction site was highlighted as an important privacy concern. The impediment to access of thousands of students, teachers at the entrance of the University was the other main contention raised in the writ petition.
5. On the other hand, the DMRC had projected that after construction of the University Metro Station, 2 hectares of land remained surplus and the housing project was intended to generate revenue for the DMRC as per the policy of the Government. The formal application made to the authorities for change of land use and approval secured for conversion of the land for residential use, was also highlighted by the DMRC.
6. The learned Single Judge having noticed the entire sequence refused to entertain the writ petition of the University including on the ground of delay and laches. In the judgment dated 27.04.2015 the Court however observed that DDA is the master of the formulation and implementation of the Master Plan and, necessary approvals have been taken from various statutory authorities for the housing project. It was also observed that the change in the land use from "public" to "residential" is permissible by adverting to the Delhi High Court's Division Bench judgment in Adil Singh v. Union of India MANU/DE/2082/2010 : (2010) 171 DLT 748. According to the Writ court, since it was a policy decision taken by the Government body and since the Appellant-University has failed to demonstrate any illegality, impropriety, mala fide in the decision making by the authority, interference of the Court with the policy decision, would not be justified.
7. It is the case of the Appellant that following the dismissal of the writ petition and being concerned about the future use of the subject land, the University Authorities constituted a Committee to recommend the appropriate course of action to be taken by the University. The Committee's report furnished on 11.11.2016 is stated to have been laid before the Executive Council of the University and after due consideration of the report and the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the Executive Council of the University through their resolution dated 28.02.2017/07.03.2017 decided to prefer an intra-Court Appeal in the High Court.
8. While the above deliberations were on, accessibility concern to the University's Metro Station area was raised under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 by persons with disabilities. The University also received a report on preventive measures to be taken in the accident-prone area of the Metro Station. With these and other projection, the appeal in LPA No. 89/2018 came to be filed on 01.03.2018 after a delay of 916 days, together with the C.M. No. 8654/2018 for condonation of delay in filing the appeal.
9. The delay of 916 days caused in preferring the Appeal was explained in the application seeking delay condonation and the rejoinder to the reply to said application to the following effect;
(i) Non-convening of Executive Council and delay occasioned due to non-availability of Vice-Chancellor. The case in the present LPA is different from other routine litigation preferred or contested by the Appellant. It is the only case where, the approval from the Executive Council of the University of Delhi was required to be taken and before such approval, various deliberations preceded so as to appraise the Executive Council of the different shades of the subject matter. Being a statutory body, an adherence to the just method of decision making requires consultations with affected departments of the University itself and therefore, the final say in the matter rests with the Executive Council which is constituted Under Section 21 of the Delhi University Act, 1922. The Council includes the senior most Deans, democratically elected representatives of teachers, the Visitor's nominee, the Registrar, and the Vice-Chancellor.
(ii) The judgment of learned Single Judge was sent by the Counsel representing the University quite late and it was, then, place before the Legal Cell of the University for examining the matter. After going through the voluminous paper book, it was opined that the matter be referred to the Vice-Chancellor for consideration and pursuant thereto, a meeting was held, wherein it was decided that the matter needs to be dealt with holistically, having regard to all the issues decided and connotations thereof. The issue could not be taken up for consideration as the post of Vice-Chancellor had fallen vacant w.e.f. 28.10.2015 and could be considered only after the new Vice-Chancellor had assumed office and taken stock of things. On 10.03.2016, the new Vice-Chancellor joined the office and in order to ensure democratic functioning of the University, he decided to constitute a Committee comprising of senior faculty persons representing different Sections of the University. The terms of reference of the Five-member Committee were, to recommend the course of action to the University in the light of the dismissal of the Writ Petition filed by the University in the DMRC matter.
(iii) On 11.11.2016, the above constituted Committee gave its Report. Based on the Report of the five-member Committee, it was decided by the Competent Authority that the subject matter of the present case be referred to the Executive Council of the University for its final decision. In the Executive Council meeting held on 28.02.2017, the matter was discussed. The item was again discussed in the Executive Council meeting held on 7.3.2017 (continued meeting), where the members of the Council referred to the earlier discussions and decisions of both the Academic Council and the Executive Council with respect to the same matter and it was decided unanimously to prefer an Appeal against the Order of the learned Single Judge dated 27.04.2015 after adequate preparation.
(iv) In the meanwhile, reservation was strongly put forth by the disabled students and faculty in the light of the proposed project by the private builder at the very main entrance of the University of Delhi. Such representations were received from individuals as well as groups which the University had to consider and were therefore forwarded to the Equal Opportunity Cell for consideration. The Equal Opportunity Cell, University of Delhi, which looks after the welfare of disabled students and others, in the light of the new enactment on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, analyzed the probable outcome. After detailed deliberations, the Equal Opportunity Cell submitted its Report on 28.04.2017 which was brought to the notice of Competent Authorities for their consideration. The Report was considered at various levels of the University including the Office of the Dean, Student Welfare, the Department of legal affairs, the Office of the Proctor, the Engineering Department, and the Department of Environmental Studies. Holding discussions and deliberations among these bodies and considering their inputs involved further time and it involved co-ordination and interaction with various authorities and stake holders. All this exercise involved a further period of five to six months before a considered opinion could be generated by the University of Delhi. Hence the representations and the Report of the Equal Opportunity Cell could be finally considered by the University of Delhi around the end of year 2017.
(v) In the interregnum, the accidents occurred at Chhatra Marg in December 2017 led to the need for the preparation of a Report by the Office of the Proctor of the University dated 05.02.2018 wherein the Proctor recommended the area to be declared as accident prone. Both the Reports -one by the Equal Opportunity Cell and the other by the Office of Proctor -- were sent to the Counsel concerned who was holding the brief for the preparation of the Appeal memorandum.
Subsequently legal opinion was sought and the draft appeal and petition was prepared which was thereafter got vetted and settled by the Senior Counsel. The finalized Appeal was thereafter again considered at the highest level at the University to take the final decision, which entailed some time. On 01.03.2018, the LPA was filed before the Delhi High Court.
10. The above explanation for the delayed filing was however not accepted and the Division Bench of the High Court on 29.10.2018 dismissed the LPA on the ground of delay without considering the merits of the appeal. Thus, aggrieved the Appellant-University has filed this appeal.
11. Shri Mohan Parasaran, learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant submits that the implication of the rejection of the writ petition and the LPA without considering the substantial contention raised by the University on merits would cause grave injury to the public institution. The learned Senior Counsel submits that the University Authorities have been pursuing the issue with due diligence but decision had to be taken after consultation with all the stakeholders and therefore, the delay in preferring the LPA should not be attributed to any inaction, much less a deliberate inaction. The endeavor of the Courts according to Shri Parasaran should be to do substantial justice to the parties by deciding the matters on merits but in the present case, neither the learned Single Judge nor the Division Bench of the High Court had considered the merit of the contention raised by the Appellant-University. Shri Parasaran argues that the expression "sufficient cause" is elastic enough to enable the courts to apply the law of limitation in a meaningful manner. He also projects that since the builders are yet to start their construction, the delayed filing of the LPA should not have resulted in non-consideration of the contention on merits, as major public interest issues have been raised in the present matter. The learned Senior Counsel argues that important questions effecting public interest cannot be defeated on technical objection, inasmuch as the proposed site for construction was originally owned by the Defence Ministry and the land was acquired for public purpose at public expense but is now sought to be given over to a private builder, for a profit oriented motive. The said contentions are also supplemented by Shri R. Venkataramani and Shri Ramji Srinivasan, learned Senior Advocates.
12. Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Counsel representing the applicants/intervenors submits that six girl hostels are located near to the project site and if high rise apartments are allowed to be constructed, the privacy of the hostel residents would be compromised. Ms. Arora also refers to the letter dated 25.10.1943 of the Joint Secretary, Government of India, Department of Education addressed to the Chief Commissioner of Delhi conveying the decision of the Government of India to ensure that no tall buildings are erected inside the Delhi University Campus and also the necessity of protecting University area, as an enclave. The Senior Counsel then refers to the Zonal Development Plan for Zone-"C" (Civil Lines Zone) of the DDA as approved by the Ministry of Urban Development to point out that the authorities have recognized the existence of number of old historical buildings of the colonial period within the Delhi University Campus and effort should be made to convert the Delhi University into an integrated Campus with restriction on tall buildings.
13. Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Counsel for Respondent No. 13- M/s. Young Builders would at the outset contend that though the learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant has referred to the merits of the case, keeping in view the position that the Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed the LPA on the ground of delay and laches, that aspect of the matter would require consideration at the threshold. He would assert that the delay of 916 days is an inordinate delay of more than two and a half years and in such event the principle of applying the usual test for "sufficient cause" would not arise as it is not merely the number of days requiring condonation but also amounts to laches in filing the writ petition, as well as the LPA. Mere contention that the proceedings initiated by the Appellant is in public interest would not advance the case inasmuch as the learned Single Judge having adverted to all these aspects has arrived at the conclusion that the petition suffers from laches in addition to there being no merit and in such circumstance when the LPA was once again delayed by 916 days the Division Bench was justified in its conclusion. It is pointed out that the said delay of 916 days is as against the period of 30 days which is allowed in law for filing the LPA. It is contended that the cause of action if any should be construed on 23.09.2005 when the area was converted into residential, but the writ petition was filed only on 07.05.2012 and despite the writ petition having been disposed of on 27.04.2015 the LPA was filed only on 01.03.2018 after a delay of 916 days. The reason assigned that a decision to file the LPA could not be taken as the office of Vice-Chancellor had fallen vacant also cannot be accepted since such vacancy arose only on 28.10.2015 while the writ petition had already been disposed of on 27.04.2015 and there was sufficient time to file the LPA if they had the intention to do so. The learned Senior Counsel further refers to the large number of cases that was filed on behalf of the University during the said period. It is contended that while considering condonation of delay the prejudice that would be caused to the opposite side is also one of the aspects to be considered. If that situation is kept in view, in the instant case the request for proposal in favour of the Respondent No. 13 was notified on 23.06.2008 and the Letter of Acceptance was issued on 13.08.2008 and the lease being for 90 years, already 11 years have passed and by such belated proceedings the project is prejudicially hampered. The Respondent No. 13 has already spent Rs. 233 crores being the lease amount paid to the DMRC and also for securing appropriate approvals. It is contended that the Respondent No. 13 had to face earlier litigation as well which has been taken note by the learned Single Judge and the Respondent cannot be exposed to such repeated litigations.
14. Shri Tushar Mehta, the learned Solicitor General appearing on behalf of Respondent No. 11 - DMRC, has contended that the Ministry of Urban Development as a matter of Policy of the Government of India had permitted the DMRC to generate its own resources through property development and has accordingly permitted to carry out property development on the land transferred to it by the Government. In such event when the DMRC has taken such steps not only in the instant case but also in several other projects, any interference at this stage more particularly when there is belated challenge of the present nature, it would have a serious impact on the projects undertaken. It was submitted that due to certain changes affected in the manner in which the Metro Rail Project was to be implemented there was some excess land which has been put to use to generate resources for the project and in that regard when there is a contractual relationship with Respondent No. 13 if the much belated petition is entertained at this stage, there would be a great financial impact which is also a loss to the public exchequer and in such event the public interest would be better served by not condoning the delay in such matters. Moreover, it is not a case of mere delay in filing the LPA but is a serious case of laches. It is also noticed by the learned Single Judge that the writ petition itself was filed after 7-8 years and in such event if the discretionary orders passed in the writ jurisdiction is interfered in the limited jurisdiction of this Court, it would set a bad precedent.
15. Shri A.N.S. Nandkarni, learned Additional Solicitor General would also refer to the aspect of delay and laches and supplement the arguments advanced by the learned Solicitor General. He would further contend that the Union of India being the owner of the land which was acquired does not have objection for the project and in such event interference at the instance of the Appellant herein would not be justified. Ms. Binu Tamta, learned Counsel submitted in support of the contentions raised by the Respondents.
16. Shri Mohan Parasaran, learned Senior Counsel in reply to the said contention would reiterate the contentions put forth relating to the explanation of delay and would contend that the conclusion of the learned Single Judge that the writ petition was hit by laches is fallacious inasmuch as the Respondent No. 13 themselves had filed a writ petition raising certain disputes with regard to the limit of FAR through the Notification dated 20.01.2005 and such challenge by the Respondent No. 13 had come to an end on 18.05.2011 and the NOC etc. were obtained subsequently, after which the writ petition was filed by the Appellant herein in the year 2012. Hence the delay and laches has been explained and it is not a case of negligence. It is contended that the stand of the DMRC that it would be put to financial loss cannot be accepted at this point since the question as to whether they would be liable to pay interest or not are matters which would have to be considered in appropriate proceedings. Hence, he contends that the High Court ought to have condoned the delay and the matter should have been considered on its merits.
17. Though we have exhaustively referred to the pleadings and the contentions of the parties, including contentions put forth on merits, the same is only for completeness and to put the matter in perspective before considering the issue relating to delay and laches. In the instant case, considering that the Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed the LPA on the ground of delay of 916 days, that aspect of the matter would require consideration at the outset and the facts on merits is noted to the limited extent to find out whether in that background the public interest would suffer. The learned Senior Counsel for the Appellant in order to impress upon this Court the principle relating to consideration of "sufficient cause" for condonation of delay and the factors that are required to be kept in view, has relied on the decision in the case of Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag and Anr. v. Katiji and Ors., MANU/SC/0460/1987 : 1987(2) SCC 107 wherein it is held as hereunder:
3. The legislature has conferred the power to condone delay by enacting Section 5 [Any appeal or any application, other than an application under any of the provisions of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, may be admitted after the prescribed period if the Appellant or the applicant satisfies the court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal or making the application within such period.] of the Indian Limitation Act of 1963 in order to enable the courts to do substantial justice to parties by disposing of matters on "merits". The expression "sufficient cause" employed by the legislature is adequately elastic to enable the courts to apply the law in a meaningful manner which subserves the ends of justice -- that being the life-purpose for the existence of the institution of courts. It is common knowledge that this Court has been making a justifiably liberal approach in matters instituted in this Court. But the message does not appear to have percolated down to all the other courts in the hierarchy. And such a liberal approach is adopted on principle as it is realized that:
1. Ordinarily a litigant does not stand to benefit by lodging an appeal late.
2. Refusing to condone delay can result in a meritorious matter being thrown out at the very threshold and cause of justice being defeated. As against this when delay is condoned the highest that can happen is that a cause would be decided on merits after hearing the parties.
3. "Every day's delay must be explained" does not mean that a pedantic approach should be made. Why not every hour's delay, every second's delay? The doctrine must be applied in a rational common-sense pragmatic manner.
4. When substantial justice and technical considerations are pitted against each other, cause of substantial justice deserves to be preferred for the other side cannot claim to have vested right in injustice being done because of a non-deliberate delay.
5. There is no presumption that delay is occasioned deliberately, or on account of culpable negligence, or on account of mala fides. A litigant does not stand to benefit by resorting to delay. In fact he runs a serious risk.
6. It must be grasped that judiciary is respected not on account of its power to legalize injustice on technical grounds but because it is capable of removing injustice and is expected to do so.
Making a justice-oriented approach from this perspective, there was sufficient cause for condoning the delay in the institution of the appeal. The fact that it was the "State" which was seeking condonation and not a private party was altogether irrelevant. The doctrine of equality before law demands that all litigants, including the State as a litigant, are accorded the same treatment and the law is administered in an even-handed manner. There is no warrant for according a step-motherly treatment when the "State" is the applicant praying for condonation of delay. In fact experience shows that on account of an impersonal machinery (no one in charge of the matter is directly hit or hurt by the judgment sought to be subjected to appeal) and the inherited bureaucratic methodology imbued with the note-making, file-pushing and passing-on-the-buck ethos, delay on its part is less difficult to understand though more difficult to approve. In any event, the State which represents the collective cause of the community, does not deserve a litigant-non-grata status. The courts therefore have to be informed with the spirit and philosophy of the provision in the course of the interpretation of the expression "sufficient cause". So also the same approach has to be evidenced in its application to matters at hand with the end in view to do even-handed justice on merits in preference to the approach which scuttles a decision on merits. Turning to the facts of the matter giving rise to the present appeal, we are satisfied that sufficient cause exists for the delay. The order of the High Court dismissing the appeal before it as time-barred, is therefore, set aside. Delay is condoned. And the matter is remitted to the High Court. The High Court will now dispose of the appeal on merits after affording reasonable opportunity of hearing to both the sides.