MANU/SC/0686/1996
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Writ Petn. (C) No. 914 of 1991
Decided On: 28.08.1996
Appellants:Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Kuldip Singh, Faizanuddin and K. Venkataswami, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appearing Parties: R. Mohan, V.A. Bobde, Kapil Sibal, M.R. Sharma and V.C. Mahajan, Advs
Subject: Environment
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 226, Constitution Of India - Article 32, Constitution Of India - Article 47, Constitution Of India - Article 48A, Constitution Of India - Article 51A(g); Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 3(3), Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 4, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 5, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 7, Environment Protection Act, 1986 - Section 8; Water (prevention And Control Of Pollution) Act, 1974 - Section 63
Disposition:
Case Remanded
Relevant Section:
ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986 - Section 3
Authorities Referred:
Laws of England; (Commentaries on the Laws of England of Sir William Blackstone) Vol. III, fourth edition published in 1876. Chapter XIII, "Of Nuisance" depicts the law on the subject
Citing Reference:


Dissented
  1

Mentioned
  3

Background :

Environment - Public interest Litigation(PIL) - Section 63 of the Water Prevention and Control of Pollution Act 1974 - PIL filled under Article 32 of the Constitution of India by Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum - Directed against the environmental degradation

Issues :

Whether right to fresh air is a constitutional and a right which is statutory recognized?

Holding :

It is the Constitutional and statutory provisions to protect a persons right to fresh air, clean water and pollution free environment, but the source of the right is the inalienable common law right of clean environment. Article 21 of the Constitution of India guarantees protection of life and personal liberty which includes right to fresh air.
Ratio Decidendi:
The "Polluter Pays" principle as interpreted by this Court means that the absolute liability for harm to the environment extends not only to compensate the victims of pollution but also the cost of restoring the environmental degradation. Remediation of the damaged environment is part of the process of "Sustainable Development" and as such polluter is liable to pay the cost to the individual sufferers as well as the cost of reversing the damaged ecology.
Cases Referred:
Addl. Distt. Magistrate Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla MANU/SC/0062/1976; Joly George Varghese's case MANU/SC/0014/1980; Gramophone Company's case MANU/SC/0187/1984
ORDER
Kuldip Singh, J.
1. This petition - public interest - under Article 32 of the Constitution of India has been filed by Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum and is directed against the pollution which is being caused by enormous discharge of untreated effluent by the tanneries and other industries in the State of Tamil Nadu. It is stated that the tanneries are discharging untreated effluent into agricultural fields, road-sides, waterways and open lands. The untreated effluent is finally discharged in river Palar which is the main source of water supply to the residents of the area. According to the petitioner the entire surface and sub-soil water of river Palar has been polluted resulting in non-availability of potable water to the residents of the area. It is stated that the tanneries in the State of Tamil Nadu have caused environmental degradation in the area. According to the preliminary survey made by the Tamil Nadu Agricultural University Research center Vellore nearly 35,000 hectares of agricultural land in the Tanneries Belt, has become either partially or totally unfit for cultivation. It has been further stated in the petition that the tanneries used about 170 types of chemicals in the chrome tanning processes. The said chemicals include sodium chloride, lime, sodium sulphate, chromium sulphate, fat liquor Ammonia and sulphuric acid besides dyes which are used in large quantities. Nearly 35 litres of water is used for processing one kilogram of finished leather, resulting in dangerously enormous quantities of toxic effluents being let out in the open by the tanning industry. These effluents have spoiled the physico-chemical properties of the soil, and have contaminated ground water by percolation. According to the petitioner an independent survey conducted by Peace Members, a non-governmental organisation, covering 13 villages of Dindigal and Peddiar Chatram Anchayat Unions, reveals that 350 well out of total of 467 used for drinking and irrigation purposes have been polluted. Women and children have to walk miles to get drinking water. Legal Aid and Advice Board of Tamil Nadu requested two lawyers namely, M.R. Ramanan and P.S. Subramanium to visit the area and submit a report indicating the extent of pollution caused by the tanneries. Relevant part of the report is as under:
As per the Technical Report dated 28.5.1983 of the Hydrological Investigations carried out in Solur village near Ambur it was noticed that 176 chemicals including acids were contained in the Tannery effluents. If 40 litres of water with chemicals are required for one Kilo of leather with the production of 200 tons of Leather per day at present and likely to be increased multifold in the next four to five years with the springing up of more tanneries like mushroom in and around Ambur Town, the magnitude of the effluent water used with chemical and acids let out daily can be shockingly imagined....The effluents are let out from the tanneries in the nearby lands, then to Goodar and Palar rivers. The lands, the rivulet and the river receive the effluents containing toxic chemicals and acids. The sub soil water is polluted ultimately affecting not only arable lands, wells used for agriculture but also drinking water wells. The entire Ambur Town and the villages situated nearby do not have good drinking water. Some of the influential and rich people are able to get drinking water from a far off place connected by a few pipes. During rainy days and floods, the chemicals deposited into the rivers and lands spread out quickly to other lands, the effluents thus let out, affect cultivation, either crops do not come up at all or if produced the yield is reduced abnormally too low....The Tanners have come to stay. The industry is a Foreign Exchange Earner. But one moot point is whether at the cost of the lives of lakhs of people with increasing human population the activities of the tanneries should be encouraged on monetary considerations. We find that the tanners have absolutely no regard for the healthy environment in and around their tanneries. The effluents discharged have been stored like a pond openly in the most of the places adjacent to cultivable lands with easy access for the animals and the people. The Ambur Municipality, which can exercise its powers as per the provisions of the Madras District Municipalities Act (1920) more particularly under Sections 226 to 231, 249 to 253 and 338 to 342 seems to be a silent spectator probably it does not want to antagonise the highly influential and stupendously rich tanners. The powers given under Section 63 of the Water Prevention and Control of Pollution Act 1974 (6 of 1974) have not been exercised in the case of tanneries in Ambur and the surrounding areas.
2. Alongwith the affidavit dated July 21, 1992 filed by Deputy Secretary to Government, Environment and Forest Department of Tamil Nadu, a list of villages affected by the tanneries has been attached. The list mentions 59 villages in the three Divisions of Thirupathur, Vellore and Ranipath. There is acute shortage of drinking water in these 59 villages and as such alternative arrangements were being made by the Government for the supply of drinking water.
3. In the affidavit dated January 9, 1992 filed by Member Secretary, Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board (the Board), it has been stated as under :
It is submitted that there are 584 tanneries in North Arcot Ambedkar District vide annexure 'A' and 'D'. Out of which 443 Tanneries have applied for consent of the Board. The Government were concerned with the treatment and disposal of effluent from tanneries. The Government gave time upto 31.7.1985 to tanneries to put up Effluent Treatment Plant (E.T.P.). So far 33 tanneries in North Arcot Ambedkar District have put up Effluent Treatment Plant. The Board has stipulated standards for the effluent to be disposed by the tanneries.
4. The affidavits filed on behalf of State of Tamil Nadu and the Board clearly indicate that the tanneries and other polluting industries in the State of Tamil Nadu are being persuaded for the last about 10 years to control the pollution generated by them. They were given option either to construct common effluent treatment plants for a cluster of industries or to set up individual pollution control devices. The Central Government agreed to give substantial subsidy for the construction of common effluent treatment plants (CETPs). It is a pity that till date most of the tanneries operating in the State of Tamil Nadu have not taken any step to control the pollution caused by the discharge of effluent. This Court on May 1, 1995 passed a detailed order. In the said order this Court noticed various earlier orders passed by this Court and finally directed as under :
Mr. R. Mohan, learned senior counsel for the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has placed before us a consolidated statement dividing the 553 industries into three parts. The first part in Statement No. 1 and the second part in Statement No. 2 relate to those tanneries who have set up the Effluent Treatment Plants either individually or collectively to the satisfaction of the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board. According to the report placed on the record by the Board, these industries in Statements 1 and 2 have not achieved the standard or have not started functioning to the satisfaction of the Board. So far as the industries in Statements 1 and 2 are concerned, we give them three months notice from today to complete the setting up of Effluent Treatment Plant (either individually or collectively) failing which they shall be liable to pollution fine on the basis of their past working and also liable to be closed. We direct the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board to issue individual notices to all these industries within two weeks from today. The Board is also directed to issue a general notice on three consecutive days in a local newspaper which has circulation in the District concerned.
So far as the 57 tanneries listed in Statement III (including 12 industries who have filed writ petition, Nos. of which have been given above) are concerned, these units have not installed and commissioned the Effluent Treatment Plants despite various orders issued by this Court from time to time. Mr. R. Mohan, learned senior counsel appearing for Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board states that the Board has issued separate notices to these units directing them to set up the Effluent Treatment Plants. Keeping in view the fact that this Court has been monitoring the matter for the last about four years and various orders have been issued by this Court from time to time, there is no justification to grant any further time to these industries. We, therefore, direct the 57 industries listed hereunder to be closed with immediate effect.... We direct the District Collector and the Senior Superintendent of Police of the District to have our orders complied with immediately. Both these Officers shall file a report in this Court within one week of the receipt of the order.
We give opportunity to these 57 industries to approach this Court as and when any steps towards the setting up of Effluent Treatment Plants and their commissioning have been taken by these industries. If any of the industries wish to be re-located to some other area, they may come out with a proposal in that respect.
5. On July 28, 1995 this Court suspended the closure order in respect of seven industries mentioned therein for a period of eight weeks. It was further observed as under :
Mr. G. Ramaswamy, learned senior advocate appearing for some of the tanneries in Madras states that the setting up of the effluent treatment plants is progressing satisfactorily. According to him several lacs have already been spent and in a short time it would start operating. Mr. Mohan, learned counsel for the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, states that the team of the Board will inspect the project and file a report by 3rd August, 1995.
6. This Court on September 8, 1995 passed the following order :
The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has filed its report. List No. 1 relates to about 299 industries. It is stated by Mr. G. Ramaswamy, Mr. Kapil Sibal and Mr. G.L. Sanghi, learned senior advocates appearing for these industries, that the setting up of the projects is in progress. According to the learned counsel Tamil Nadu Leather Development Corporation (TALCO) is in charge of the project. The learned counsel state that the project shall be completed in every respect within 3 months from today. The details of these industries and the projects undertaken by TALCO as per list No. I is as under.... We are of the view that it would be in the interest of justice to give a little more time to these industries to complete the project. Although the industries have asked time for three months, we give them time till 31st December, 1995. We make it clear that in case the projects are not completed by that time, the industries shall be liable to be closed forthwith. Apart from that, these industries shall also be liable to pollution fine for the past period during which they had been operating.
We also take this opportunity to direct TALCO to take full interest in these projects and have the projects completed within the time granted by us.
Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned counsel appearing for the tanneries, stated that Council for Indian Finished Leather manufactures Export Association is a body which is collecting 5% on all exports. This body also helps the tanneries in various respect. We issue notice to the Association to be present in this Court and assist this Court in all the matters pertaining to the leather tanneries in Madras. Mr. Sampath takes notice.
So far as List No. II is concerned, it relates to about 163 tanneries (except M/s. Vibgyor Tanners & Co., Kailasagiri Road, Mittalam 635 811, Ambur (via). The Pollution Control Board has inspected all these tanneries and placed its report before us. According to the report most of these tanneries have not even started primary work at the spot. Some of them have not even located the land. The tanneries should have themselves set up the pollution control devices right at the time when they started working. They have not done so. They are not even listening to various orders passed by this Court from time to time during the last more than 2 years. It is on the record that these tanneries are polluting the area. Even the water around the area where they are operating is not worth drinking. We give no further time to these tanneries. We direct all the following tanneries which are numbering about 162 to be closed with immediate effect.
It may be mentioned that this Court suspended the closure orders in respect of various industries from time to time to enable the said industries to install the pollution control devices.
7. This Court by the order dated October 20, 1995 directed the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur (NEERI) to send a team of experts to examine, in particular, the feasibility of setting up of CETPs for cluster of tanneries situated at different places in the State of Tamil Nadu where the work of setting up of the CETPs has not started and also to inspect the existing CETPs including those where construction work was in progress. NEERI submitted its first report on December 9, 1995 and the second report on February 12, 1996. This Court examined the two reports and passed the following order on April 9, 1996 :
Pursuant to this Court's order dated December 15, 1995, NEERI has submitted Final Examination Report dated February 12, 1996, regarding CETPs constructed/under construction by the Tanneries in various districts of the State of Tamil Nadu. A four member team constituted by the Director, NEERI inspected the CETPs from January 27 to February 12, 1996. According to the report, at present 30 CETPs sites have been identified for tannery clusters in the five districts of Tamil Nadu viz., North Arcot Ambedkar, Erode Periyar, Dindigul Anna, Trichi and Chengai M.G.R. All the 30 CETPs were inspected by the Team. According to the report, only 7 CETPs are under operation, while 10 are under construction and 13 are proposed. The following 7 ETPs are under operation :
1. M/s. TALCO Ranipet Tannery Effluent Treatment Co. Ltd. Ranipet, Dist. North Arcot Ambedkar.
2. M/s. TALCO Ambur Tannery Effluent Treatment Co. Ltd., Thuthipet Sector, Ambur Dist. North Arcot Ambedkar.
3. M/s. TALCO Vaniyambadi Tanners Enviro Control Systems Ltd., Vaniyambattu, Vaniyambadi, Dt. North Arcot.
4. M/s. Pallavaram Tanners Industrial Effluent Treatment Co., Chrompet Area, Dist. Chengai MGR.
5. M/s. Ranipet SIDCO Finished Leather Effluent Treatment Co. Pvt. Ltd., Ranipet, Dist. North Arcot Ambedkar.
6. M/s. TALCO Vaniyambadi Tanners Enviro Control Systems Ltd., Udayandiram, Vaniyambadi, Dist. North Arcot Ambedkar.
7. M/s. TALCO Pernambut Tannery Effluent Treatment Co. Ltd., Bakkalapalli, Pernambut, Dist. North Arcot Ambedkar.
The CETPs mentioned at Sl. Nos. 5, 6 & 7 were commissioned in January, 1996 and were on the date of report passing through stabilization period. The report indicates that so far as the above CETPs are concerned, although there is improvement in the performance, they are still not operating at their optimal level and are not meeting the standards as laid down by the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board for inland surface water discharge. The NEERI has given various recommendations to be followed by the above mentioned units. We direct the units to comply with the recommendations of NEERI within two months from today. The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board Shall monitor the directions and have the recommendations of the NEERI Complied with. So far as the three units which are under stabilization, the NEERI Team may inspect the same and place a final report before this Court within the period of two months.
Apart from the tanneries which are connected with the above mentioned 7 units, there are large number of other tanneries operating in the 5 districts mentioned above which have not set up any satisfactory pollution control devices. Mr. Mohan, learned counsel for the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board states that notices were issued to all those tanneries from time to time directing them to set up the necessary pollution control devices. It is mandatory for the tanneries to set up the pollution control devices. Despite notices it has not been done. This Court has been monitoring these matters for the last about 4 year. There is no awakening or realisation to control the pollution which is being generated by these tanneries.
The NEERI has indicated the physico-chemical characteristics of ground water from dug wells near tannery clusters. According to the report, water samples show that well-waters around the tanneries are unfit for drinking. The report also shows that the quality of water in Palar river down stream from the place where effluent is discharged, is highly polluted. We, therefore, direct that all the tanneries in the districts of North Arcot Ambedkar, Erode Periyar, Dindigul Anna, Trichi and Chengai M.G.R. which are not connected with the seven CETPs mentioned above, shall be closed with immediate effect. None of these tanneries shall be permitted to operate till the time the CETPs are constructed to the satisfaction of the Tamil Nadu Pollution control Board. We direct the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police of the area concerned, to have all these tanneries closed with immediate effect. Mr. Mehta has placed on record the report of Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board. In Statement I of the Index, there is a list of 30 industries which have also not been connected with any CETPs. According to the report, these industries have not, till date set up pollution control devices. We direct the closure of these industries also. List is as under.... The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has filed another report dated January 18, 1996 pertaining to 51 Tanneries. There is dispute regarding the permissible limit of the quantity of total dissolved solids (TDS). Since the NEERI team is visiting these tanneries, they may examine the TDS aspect also and advise this Court accordingly. Meanwhile, we do not propose to close any of the tannery on the ground that it is discharging more than 2001 TDS.
The report indicates that except the 17 units, all other units are non-complaint units in the sense that they are not complying with the BOD standards. Excepting these 17 industries, the remaining 34 tanneries listed hereunder are directed to be closed forthwith.... We direct the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of the police of the area concerned to have also these industries mentioned above close forthwith. The tanneries in the 5 districts of Tamil Nadu referred to in this order have been operating for a long time. Some of the tanneries are operating for a period of more than two decades. All this period, these tanneries have been polluting the area. Needles to say that the total environment in the area has been polluted. We issue show cause notice to these industries through their learned counsel who are present in Court, why they be not subjected to heavy pollution fine. We direct the State of Tamil Nadu through the Industry Ministry, the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board and all other authorities concerned and also the Government of India through the Ministry of Environment and Forests, not to permit the setting up of further tanneries in the State of Tamil Nadu.
Copy of this order be communicated to the concerned authorities within three days. To come up for further consideration after the replies to the show cause. There are large number of tanneries in the State of Tamil Nadu which have set up individual pollution control devices and which according to the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, are operating satisfactorily. The fact, however, remains that all these tanneries are discharging the treated effluents within the factory precinct itself. We direct NEERI Team which is visiting this area to find out as to whether the discharge of the effluent on the land within the factory premises is permissible environmentally. M/s. Nandeem Tanning Company, Valayampet Vaniyambadi is one of such industries. Copy of the report submitted by the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board be forwarded to the NEERI. NEERI may inspect this industry within ten days and file a report in this Court. Copy of this order be communicated to NEERI.
Matters regarding Distilleries in the State of Tamil Nadu.
The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has placed on record the factual report regarding 6 Distilleries mentioned in page 4 of the Index of its Report dated April 5, 1996. Learned counsel for the Board states that the Board shall issue necessary notices to these industries to set up pollution control devices to the satisfaction of the Board, failing which these distilleries shall be closed. The Pollution Control Board shall place a status report before this Court.
The NEERI submitted two further reports on May 1, 1996 and June 11, 1996 in respect of CETPs set up by various industries. The NEERI reports indicate that the physico-chemical characteristics of ground water from dug wells in Ranipath, Thuthipath, Valayambattu, Vaniyambadi and various other places do not conform to the limits prescribed for drinking purposes.
8. This Court has been monitoring this petition for almost five years. The NEERI, Board and the Central Pollution Control Board (Central Board) have visited the tanning and other industries in the State of Tamil Nadu for several times. These expert bodies have offered all possible assistance to these industries. The NEERI reports indicate that even the seven operational CETPs are not functioning to its satisfaction. NEERI has made several recommendations to be followed by the operational CETPs. Out of the 30 CETP-sites which have been identified for tannery clusters in the five districts of North Arcot Ambedkar, Erode Periyar, Dindigul Anna, Thrichi and Chengai MGR. 7 are under operation 10 are under construction and 13 are proposed. There are large number of tanneries which are not likely to be connected with with any CETP and are required to set up pollution control devices on their own. Despite repeated extension granted by this Court during the last five years and prior to that by the Board the tanneries in the State of Tamil Nadu have miserably failed to control the pollution generated by them.
9. It is no doubt correct that the leather industry in India has become a major foreign exchange earner and at present Tamil Nadu is the leading exporter of finished leather accounting for approximately 80% of the country's export. Though the leather industry is of vital importance to the country as it generates foreign exchange and provides employment avenues it has no right to destroy the ecology, degrade the environment and pose as a health hazard. It cannot be permitted to expand or even to continue with the present production unless it tackles by itself the problem of pollution created by the said industry.
10. The traditional concept that development and ecology are opposed to each other, is no longer acceptable. "Sustainable Development" is the answer. In the International sphere "Sustainable Development" as a concept came to be known for the first time in the Stockholm Declaration of 1972.