MANU/SC/0067/2021
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 273 of 2021 and Special Leave Petition (C) No. 1882 of 2021
Decided On: 11.02.2021
Appellants: Vikash Kumar
Vs.
Respondent: Union Public Service Commission and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, Indira Banerjee and Sanjiv Khanna, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Rajan Mani, Adv., Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar, AOR, Ritu Kumar, Anupama NG and Karun Sharma, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: Madhavi Divan, ASG, Gopal Jha, A.K. Kaul, Aakanksha Kaul, Nidhi Khanna, Advs., Raj Bahadur Yadav, Amrish Kumar, AORs, Naresh Kaushik, Adv. and Lalita Kaushik, AOR
Subject: Constitution
Subject: Service
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Prior History:
Arising out of impugned final Judgment and Order dated 25.09.2018 in WPC No. 9942/2018 passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi MANU/DE/8249/2018
Relevant Section:
Constitution Of India - Article 14; Constitution Of India - Article 19; Constitution Of India - Article 21
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Civil Services Examination Rules 2018; Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 16(1), Constitution of India - Article 19, Constitution of India - Article 21; Persons With Disabilities (equal Opportunities, Protection Of Rights And Full Participation) Act, 1995 - Section 2(i), Persons With Disabilities (equal Opportunities, Protection Of Rights And Full Participation) Act, 1995 - Section 2(t), Persons With Disabilities (equal Opportunities, Protection Of Rights And Full Participation) Act, 1995 - Section 31; Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 2(c), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 2(h), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 2(r), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 2(s), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 2(y), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 2(zc), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 3, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 17, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 17(i), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 20, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 21, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 31, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 32, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 33, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 34, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 35, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 36, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 37, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 39, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 44, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 56, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016 - Section 57; Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Rules, 2017 - Rule 3(1), Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Rules, 2017 - Rule 8, Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Rules, 2017 - Rule 8(3)
Cases Referred:
Jeeja Ghosh and Ors. v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/0574/2016; Disabled Rights Group and Ors. v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/1605/2017; Union of India (UOI) and Ors. v. National Federation of the Blind and Ors. MANU/SC/1025/2013; Syed Bashir-ud-din Qadri v. Nazir Ahmed Shah and Ors. MANU/SC/0158/2010; V. Surendra Mohan v. State of Tamil Nadu and Ors. MANU/SC/0055/2019; Rajive Raturi v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. MANU/SC/1618/2017; Sunanda Bhandare Foundation v. Union of India (2018) 2 SCC 397; First Group Plc v. Paulley MANU/UKSC/0005/2017 : (2017) UKSC 4; Ms. JH v. Australia; Michael Lockrey v. Australia; Gemma Beasley v. Australia
Case Category:
SERVICE MATTERS - RECRUITMENT/TRANSFER/COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  4

Mentioned
  7

Case Note:
Service - Facility of scribe - Entitled to - Sections 2(r), 2(s), 31, 32, 33, 34, 36 and 37 of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 - Appellant had disability in form of dysgraphia, commonly known as a Writer's Cramp - Respondent-Commission issued notification for CSE - Department of Personnel and Training issued CSE Rules 2018 providing for manner and conduct of examination - In his online application for CSE, Appellant declared himself to be person with benchmark disability of forty percent or more - Appellant requested Commission to provide him with scribe for examination - Commission rejected request on ground that scribe could be provided only to blind candidates and candidates with locomotor disability or cerebral palsy with impairment of at least forty percent and Appellant did not meet this criterion - Aggrieved by denial of services of scribe for CSE, Appellant moved Tribunal - Tribunal dismissed application filed by Appellant on ground that, since Hospital had refused to issue disability certificate, Appellant could not claim access to scribe as disabled candidate - Appellant instituted writ petition before High Court and challenged legality of CSE Rules 2018 - Meanwhile, he obtained medical certificate declaring that he had Writer's Cramp and would require scribe during his examinations -Division Bench of High Court declined to interfere with order of Tribunal on ground that Appellant had not qualified at Preliminary Examination for CSE 2018 and thus, relief seeking amendment of CSE Rules 2018 to provide scribes to candidates with specific disabilities was rendered otiose - Hence, present appeal - Whether Appellant would be entitled to facility of scribe for appearing at Civil Services Examination and any other competitive selection conducted under authority of government.

Facts:

The Appellant had a disability in the form of dysgraphia, commonly known as a Writer's Cramp. The Respondent-Commission issued notification for the CSE. The Department of Personnel and Training issued the CSE Rules 2018 providing for the manner and conduct of the examination. The general instructions provided that all candidates must write their papers in their own hand and will not be allowed the help of a scribe. Exceptions to this Rule were provided for blind candidates candidates with locomotor disability and cerebral palsy where the dominant (writing) was affected to the extent of slowing the performance of function (minimum of forty impairment). Candidates within the exception were allowed the help of a scribe. An additional compensatory time of twenty minutes per hour was also to be granted to such candidates. In his online application for the CSE 2018, the Appellant declared himself to be a person with a benchmark disability of forty percent or more. By his email, the Appellant requested the Commission to provide him with a scribe for the examination. The Respondent-Commissioner rejected the request on the ground that a scribe could be provided only to blind candidates and candidates with locomotor disability or cerebral palsy with an impairment of at least forty percent and the Appellant did not meet this criterion. Aggrieved by the denial of the services of a scribe for the CSE 2018, the Appellant moved the Tribunal. The Tribunal dismissed the application filed by the Appellant on the ground that, since Hospital had refused to issue a disability certificate, the Appellant could not claim access to a scribe as a disabled candidate. The Appellant instituted a writ petition before the High Court of Delhi and challenged the legality of the CSE Rules 2018. Meanwhile, he obtained a medical certificate from National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), declaring that he had a Writer's Cramp and would require a scribe during his examinations. A Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi by an order declined to interfere with the order of the Tribunal on the ground that the Appellant had not qualified at the Preliminary Examination for CSE 2018 and thus, the relief seeking an amendment of the CSE Rules 2018 to provide scribes to candidates with specific disabilities was rendered otiose.

Held, while allowing the appeal:

(i) MSJE was the nodal ministry which was entrusted with implementing the provisions of the RPwD Act, 2016. As the nodal ministry, it had formulated guidelines. These guidelines, confine access to a scribe, reader or lab assistant to candidates having benchmark disabilities within the meaning of Section 2(r). Yet, as the nodal ministry, it recognizes that these guidelines are not exhaustive of the circumstances or conditions in which a scribe could be provided. On the contrary, the MSJE had recognized the prevalence of other medical conditions not identified as disabilities per se but which may hamper the writing capability of a person. It specifically leaves it open to every examining body to consider such cases for the grant of scribe, extra time or other facilities in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare against the production of a medical certificate, in line with those prescribed for candidates with benchmark disabilities. [23]

(ii) The concept of benchmark disabilities under the RPwD Act, 2016 has specifically been adopted in relation with the provisions of Chapter VI and Chapter VII. Chapter VI contains special provisions for persons with benchmark disabilities. Among those provisions was Section 31 (free education for children with benchmark disability), Section 32 (reservation in higher educational institutions), Section 33 (identification of posts for reservation), Section 34 (reservation), Section 36 (Special Employment Exchange) and Section 37 (Special Schemes and Development Programmes). Chapter VII contains special provisions for persons with benchmark disabilities in need of high support. Thus, the concept of benchmark disabilities had been adopted by the legislation bearing in mind specific provisions which were contained in the law for persons meeting this description. [30]

(iii) Conflating the rights and entitlements which inhere in persons with disabilities with the notion of benchmark disabilities does dis-service to the salutary purpose underlying the enactment of the RPwD Act 2016. Worse still, to deny the rights and entitlements recognized for persons with disabilities on the ground that they did not fulfill a benchmark disability would be plainly ultra vires the RPwD Act 2016. [31]

(iv) The principle of reasonable accommodation captures the positive obligation of the State and private parties to provide additional support to persons with disabilities to facilitate their full and effective participation in society. The concept of reasonable accommodation was developed in Section (H) below. For the present, suffice it to say that, for a person with disability, the constitutionally guaranteed fundamental rights to equality, the six freedoms and the right to life under Article 21 would ring hollow if they were not given this additional support that helps make these rights real and meaningful for them. Reasonable accommodation was the instrumentality-are an obligation as a society-to enable the disabled to enjoy the constitutional guarantee of equality and non-discrimination. [35]

(v) When the government in recognition of its affirmative duties and obligations under the RPwD Act 2016 makes provisions for facilitating a scribe during the course of the Civil Services Examination, it could not be construed to confer a largesse. Nor does it by allowing a scribe confer a privilege on a candidate. The provision for the facility of a scribe was in pursuance of the statutory mandate to ensure that persons with disabilities were able to live a life of equality and dignity based on respect in society for their bodily and mental integrity. There was a fundamental fallacy on the part of the UPSE/DoPT in proceeding on the basis that the facility of a scribe shall be made available only to persons with benchmark disabilities. This was occasioned by the failure of the MSJE to clarify their guidelines. The whole concept of a benchmark disability within the meaning of Section 2(r) was primarily in the context of special provisions including reservation that are embodied in Chapter VI of the RPwD Act 2016. Conceivably, the Parliament while mandating the reservation of posts in government establishments and of seats in institutions of higher learning was of the view that this entitlement should be recognized for persons with benchmark disabilities. As a matter of legislative policy, these provisions in Chapter VI had been made applicable to those with benchmark disabilities where a higher threshold of disability was stipulated. Except in the specific statutory context where the norm of benchmark disability had been applied, it would be plainly contrary to both the text and intent of the enactment to deny the rights and entitlements which were recognized as inhering in persons with disabilities on the ground that they did not meet the threshold for a benchmark disability. A statutory concept which had been applied by Parliament in specific situations could not be extended to others where the broader expression, persons with disability, was used statutorily. The guidelines which had been framed could by no means be regarded as being exhaustive of the situations in which a scribe could be availed of by persons other than those who suffer from benchmark disabilities. The MSJE did not in its counter affidavit before this Court treat those guidelines as exhaustive of the circumstances in which a scribe could be provided for persons other than those having benchmark disabilities. This understanding of the MSJE was correct for the simple reason that the rights which emanate from provisions such as Section 3 extend to persons with disability as broadly defined by Section 2(s). [41]

(vi) Therefore, DoPT and UPSC had fundamentally erred in the construction which has been placed on the provisions of the RPwD Act 2016. To confine the facility of a scribe only to those who have benchmark disabilities would be to deprive a class of persons of their statutorily recognized entitlements. To do so would be contrary to the plain terms as well as the object of the statute. [42]

(vii) Insofar as the case of the Appellant was concerned, his condition has been repeatedly affirmed by several medical authorities including National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore and AIIMS. The AIIMS report which was pursuant to the order of this Court was clear in opining that the Appellant has a specified disability inasmuch as he had a chronic neurological condition. This condition Forms part of Entry IV of the Schedule to the RPwD Act 2016. The writer's cramp has been found successively to be a condition which the Appellant had, making it difficult for him to write a conventional examination. To deny the facility of a scribe in a situation such as the present would negate the valuable rights and entitlements which are recognised by the RPwD Act 2016. [73]

(viii) Therefore, the Appellant would be entitled to the facility of a scribe for appearing at the Civil Services Examination and any other competitive selection conducted under the authority of the government. [74]

(ix) Cases such as the present offer this court an opportunity to make a meaningful contribution in the project of creating the RPwD generation in India. A generation of disabled people in India which regards as its birthright access to the full panoply of constitutional entitlements, robust statutory rights geared to meet their unique needs and conducive societal conditions needed for them to flourish and to truly become co-equal participants in all facets of life. [81]

(x) Therefore, set aside the impugned judgment and order of the High Court. [82]

Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
JUDGMENT
Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.
A.
Factual background
B.
The course run: The Tribunal and High Court of Delhi
C.
These proceedings
  C.1
Arguments of the Appellant
  C.2
Arguments of the UPSC
  C.3.
Arguments of the Union of India
D.
The legal framework
E.
Two Government Ministries: A policy disconnect
F.
Benchmark disability not a precondition to obtaining a scribe
G.
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016: A paradigm-shift
  G.1
A statutory manifestation of a constitutional commitment
  G.2
Scheme of the 2016 Act
H.
Reasonable accommodation
I.
The argument of misuse
J.
The language of our discourse
K.
Realizing the transformative potential of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016: From principle to practice
L.
Case of the Appellant
M.
Formulation of new policy concerning access to scribes for persons with disabilities
N.
In summation
A. Factual background
1. A citizen who suffers from a writer's cramp has travelled to this Court. The grievance is that he was denied a scribe in the civil services' examination.1 The case has run its course through the judicial system as an individual grievance. But its contours present portents of the aspirations of a whole class of persons whose daily engagement with physical disability defines their continuing quest for dignity. Through a maze of statutes, rules, and regulations, the case raises core issues about the actual realization of equal opportunity and access to the disabled. It tests what the law professes with how its ideals are realized. The language of our discourse, as much as its outcome, should generate introspection over the path which our society has traversed and the road that lies ahead in realizing the rights of the disabled. Voices such as those of the Appellant are a constant reminder of the chasm between the law and reality. But they also provide a platform for change and evolution towards a better future.
2. Down to its bare bones, this appeal turns upon the interface of the Civil Services Examination Rules 20182 dated 7 February 2018 with the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20163.
3. The Appellant has a disability in the form of dysgraphia, commonly known as a Writer's Cramp. In August 2016, he graduated with an MBBS degree from the Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Post Graduate Medical Instruction and Research, popularly known by the acronym JIPMER. Intending to pursue a career in the civil services, he appeared in 2017 for the CSE. A scribe was provided to him by the Union Public Services Commission4 to enable him to appear in the written test. In the online application form for CSE 2017, the Appellant declared himself to be a person with locomotor disability to avail the services of a scribe. On 7 February 2018, UPSC issued a notification for the CSE 20185. The Department of Personnel and Training6 issued the CSE Rules 2018 providing for the manner and conduct of the examination. The general instructions provided that all candidates must write their papers in their own hand and will not be allowed the help of a scribe. Exceptions to this Rule were provided for blind candidates; candidates with locomotor disability and cerebral palsy where the "dominant (writing) is affected to the extent of slowing the performance of function (minimum of 40% impairment)". Candidates within the exception were allowed the help of a scribe. An additional 'compensatory time' of twenty minutes per hour was also to be granted to such candidates.
4. In his online application for the CSE 2018, the Appellant declared himself to be a person with a benchmark disability of 40% or more. By his email dated 28 February 2018, the Appellant requested the UPSC to provide him with a scribe for the examination. UPSC, by its letter dated 15 March 2018, rejected the request on the ground that a scribe could be provided only to blind candidates and candidates with locomotor disability or cerebral palsy with an impairment of at least 40% and the Appellant did not meet this criterion.
5. The Appellant also sought to appear for selection to the post of Medical Officer pursuant to the Combined Medical Services Examination 2017 conducted under the auspices of UPSC. In order to obtain a disability certificate, he approached the Medical Board of Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Delhi. By a communication dated 12 February 2018, the disability certificate was denied to him. This led the Appellant to preface a challenge before the Central Administrative Tribunal7 where the case is still pending adjudication.
B. The course run: The Tribunal and High Court of Delhi
6. Aggrieved by the denial of the services of a scribe for the CSE 2018, the Appellant moved the Tribunal. By an interim order dated 30 May 2018, the Tribunal directed the UPSC to provide him a scribe to enable him to appear for the preliminary examination. The results were published on 14 July 2018, but the Appellant's result was withheld. By a judgment dated 7 August 2018, the Tribunal dismissed the application filed by the Appellant on the ground that, since Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital had refused to issue a disability certificate, the Appellant could not claim access to a scribe as a disabled candidate. The Tribunal also noted that the Appellant did not claim the facility of a scribe in the CSE 2017 or during his MBBS graduation examinations. The Tribunal held that though in para 5 of the CSE Notification 2018, the UPSC recognized the right to a scribe, it has been limited to blind candidates and candidates having locomotor disability and cerebral palsy, where a minimum 40% impairment exists. The Appellant was held not to fulfill the criteria. The Tribunal also rejected a certificate dated 22 March 2015 issued by the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, on the ground that it failed to mention the extent of the disability. Finally, the Tribunal questioned the maintainability of the prayer of the Appellant for a direction to the UPSC to amend the CSE Notification 2018. Since the relief was in the realm of advising the executive on policy matters, the Tribunal refrained from interfering in the matter.
7. The Appellant instituted a writ petition before the High Court of Delhi and challenged the legality of the CSE Rules 2018. Meanwhile, he obtained a medical certificate dated 27 August 2018 from National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore, declaring that he has a Writer's Cramp and would require a scribe during his examinations.
8. A Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi by an order dated 25 September 2018 declined to interfere with the order of the Tribunal on the ground that the Appellant had not qualified at the Preliminary Examination for CSE 2018 and thus, the relief seeking an amendment of the CSE Rules 2018 to provide scribes to candidates with specific disabilities was rendered otiose. The Appellant was granted liberty to file another application before the Tribunal in the future. This order of the High Court of Delhi has been challenged in appeal.
C. These proceedings
9. During the course of the proceedings, by an order dated 16 January 2020, we directed the All India Institute of Medical Sciences8 to constitute a medical board to evaluate the condition of the Appellant and render its opinion on (i) whether he suffers from a benchmark disability within the meaning of Section 2(r) and Section 2(zc) of the RPwD Act, 2016; and (ii) whether he is a 'person with disability' Under Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016 and the extent of the disability. AIIMS, by its report dated 10 February 2020, opined that the Appellant suffers from a "chronic neurological condition" termed as bilateral Writer's Cramp. However, the report opines that while he does not suffer from a "benchmark disability", the Appellant is a 'person with disability' under the RPwD Act, 2016. The extent of the disability is assessed at 6%.
C.1 Arguments of the Appellant
10. Mr. Rajan Mani, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant, has made the following submissions:
i The Appellant has been issued medical certificates dated 21 March 2015 and 27 August 2018, which certify that he has a Writer's Cramp and would require a scribe. According to Section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, 2016, a person with disability means a person with long-term, physical, mental, intellectual and sensory impairment, which hinders their full and effective participation in society. These certificates prove that the Appellant falls Under Section 2(s) of the Act and is entitled to the protection of the Act;
ii Writer's Cramp, or dysgraphia, is a specific disability and is listed in entry 2(a) of the Schedule to the RPwD Act, 2016. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment9, by a notification dated 14 January 2018, has also recognized the specific learning disability of dysgraphia;
iii The CSE Rules 2018 and the CSE Notification 2018 are in violation of Section 20 of the RPwD Act, 2016. Under Section 20, every government establishment is required to provide "reasonable accommodation" and a conducive environment to employees with disability. "Reasonable accommodation" as defined in Section 2(y) means necessary and appropriate modifications and adjustments to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy their rights equally with others. The provision of scribes and compensatory time during the examination to candidates such as the Appellant are reasonable accommodations necessary to be provided under the RPwD Act, 2016;
iv The CSE Rules 2018 and the CSE Notification 2018 violate Article 14 and Article 16(1) of the Constitution and the RPwD Act, 2016 as they provide for scribes only for candidates who are blind, those suffering from locomotor disability or cerebral palsy. In the CSE Rules 2018, applications are invited from all persons with disabilities and age relaxation is also provided to them, including for those suffering from learning disabilities. However, the provision of scribes is limited to a few candidates;
v The CSE Rules 2018 fail to recognize that persons such as the Appellant with a Writer's Cramp have difficulty in writing in their own hand and thus, should be granted a similar facility of a scribe;
vi Other institutions in India, such as the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India and the University of Delhi, recognize Writer's Cramp as a disability for which candidates have been provided with scribes;
vii The medical certificates dated 21 March 2015 and 27 August 2018 indicate that the Appellant falls within the definition of a "person with disability" under the Act. Thus, even without a disability certificate, the Appellant should be granted the facility of a scribe;
viii The RPwD Act, 2016 makes a distinction between "persons with disability" and "persons with benchmark disability", the latter being those who are certified by a disability certificate to have not less than 40% of the specified disabilities enumerated under the Schedule to the Act. Persons with benchmark disability are eligible for special provisions of reservation in employment and higher education. However, Section 20 of the Act applies to all persons with disabilities and is not limited to persons with benchmark disability. Thus, even without the disability certificate, the Appellant would be entitled to measures of reasonable accommodation such as the provision of a scribe for professional examinations; and
ix The extent of the disability of 6% as evaluated by the medical board of AIIMS pertains to the extent of his locomotor disability due to a chronic neurological condition and the inability in moving himself or objects. The evaluation does not pertain to the writing ability of the Petitioner. Further, the medical report corroborates the prior medical certificates issued to the Appellant and certifies that the Appellant suffers from Writer's Cramp which causes difficulty in writing.
C.2 Arguments of the UPSC
11. Mr. Naresh Kaushik, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the UPSC, has submitted that:
i The issue relating to the entitlement of the Appellant for the facility of a scribe for writing the CSE 2018 is governed by the Rules framed by the DoPT. According to the CSE Rules 2018, persons with benchmark disabilities are provided with the facility of a scribe, if desired. In case of persons with a benchmark disability, the facility of a scribe is provided on the production of a certificate issued by a Chief Medical Officer of a Government Healthcare Institution to the effect that person concerned has a physical limitation to write and a scribe is essential to write the examination on the candidate's behalf;
ii The Appellant had made an incorrect declaration in his application for the CSE 2018 by declaring that he belongs to the category of persons with benchmark disability without possessing the prescribed medical certificate; and
iii The Appellant has failed to challenge the legality of the CSE Rules 2018 and has only made claims Under Section 20 of the RPwD Act, 2016.
C.3. Arguments of the Union of India
12. Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing for the Union of India, made the following submissions:
i According to the MSJE, Writer's Cramp is not a disability, but a person suffering from Writer's Cramp has difficulty in writing. The MSJE had also issued comprehensive guidelines dated 26 February 2013 on the conduct of written examinations for persons with disabilities, which provide that the facility of a scribe should only be allowed to a person with a disability of 40% or more. These guidelines were revised on 29 August 2018 which provide for the facility of scribes in the category of candidates affected with blindness, locomotor disability and cerebral palsy; and for other persons with benchmark disability, a medical certificate has to be produced certifying that there is a physical limitation to write and a scribe is essential to write the examination on the candidate's instructions;
ii Writer's Cramp is not specifically included in the list of specified disabilities in the Schedule of the RPwD Act, 2016. Thus, the guidelines dated 29 August 2018 are not applicable to persons suffering from Writer's Cramp. However, many such medical conditions which may hamper writing ability have not been identified as disabilities. In these instances, the examining body has to consider the cases of such candidates and whether facilities of scribes and compensatory time is to be granted;
iii There is a whole swathe of facilities which are available to persons with disabilities to ensure a more inclusive society-seats on public transport, ramp facilities and toilets. Specific measures are undertaken in educational institutions to facilitate the participation of persons with disabilities. The percentage of disability is not relevant in these contexts. However, different considerations govern the provision of facilities for persons with disabilities in competitive examinations;
iv As an extension of [iii] above, the CSE conducted by the UPSC is an extremely competitive examination. While there may be candidates below the benchmark disability threshold deserving of the facility of scribes to level the playing field, the abuse of this facility cannot be ruled out. In a competitive examination of this nature, the purity of the examination has to be preserved; and
v As regards the case of the Appellant, a fresh medical examination should be conducted, to specifically determine if his disability is such as to necessitate a scribe.
D. The legal framework
13. Broadly speaking, there are two sets of regulatory provisions which hold the field. The first consists of the notifications issued by the DoPT in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
14. On 7 February 2018, a notification was issued by the Ministry prescribing the Rules for the Conduct of the CSE to be held by the UPSC in 2018. The notification covers diverse aspects governing the conduct of the examination. Among them is Section 1 of Appendix-I which incorporates the 'plan of examination' and Section 2 which provides for the 'scheme, subjects for the preliminary and main examination'. This is followed by 'general instructions' for the conduct of the preliminary and main examination for the civil services. Insofar as is material, the general instructions contain the following stipulations:
General Instructions (Preliminary as well as Main Examination):
(i) Candidates must write the papers in their own hand. In no circumstances will they be allowed the help of a scribe to write the answers for them. However, blind candidates and candidates with Locomotor Disability and Cerebral Palsy where dominant (writing) extremity is affected to the extent of slowing the performance of function (minimum of 40% impairment) will be allowed to write the examination with the help of a scribe in both the Civil Services (Preliminary) as well as in the Civil Services (Main) Examination.
(ii) Compensatory time of twenty minutes per hour shall be permitted for the Blind candidates and the candidates with locomotor disability and cerebral palsy where dominant (writing) extremity is affected to the extent of slowing the performance of (sic)f1,mction (minimum of 40% impairment) in both the Civil Services (Preliminary) as well as in the Civil Services (Main) Examination.
These Rules have since been amended in 2019. Apart from the notification which has been issued by the UPSC, there are guidelines which have been prescribed by the MSJE in the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities. A notification has been issued on 4 January 2018 in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 56 of the RPwD Act, 2016. Section 56 is comprised in Chapter X of the RPwD Act, 2016 titled as "Certification of Specified Disabilities". Section 56 provides that:
56. Guidelines for assessment of specified disabilities.- The Central Government shall notify guidelines for the purpose of assessing the extent of specified disability in a person.
15. Thus, the guidelines which have been notified on 4 January 2018 trace their origin to the statutory power conferred by Section 56 of the RPwD Act, 2016. In their prefatory recital, the guidelines record that the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities constituted an expert committee to suggest these guidelines "for evaluation and procedure of certification by various specified disabilities". The expert committee in turn constituted eight subcommittees for dealing with the following categories:
(i) locomotor disability;
(ii) visual impairment;
(iii) hearing impairment;
(iv) chronic neurological conditions;
(v) persons affected with blood related disorders;
(vi) developmental disorders;
(vii) mental illness; and
(viii) multiple disabilities;
Following the deliberations of the expert committee, the guidelines were notified in the form of S.O. 76(E). Insofar as is material, the guidelines stipulate that:
Now, therefore, in exercise of powers conferred by Section 56 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016), the Central Government hereby notifies the guidelines for the purpose of assessing the extent of following specified disabilities in a person after having considered the recommendations of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as provided at Annexure II, namely:
I. locomotor disability including cerebral palsy, leprosy cured, dwarfism, acid attack victims and muscular dystrophy;
II. blindness and low-vision;
III. deaf and hard of hearing and speech and language disability;
IV. intellectual disability and specific learning disabilities;
V. mental illness;
VI. chronic neurological conditions;
VII. haemophilia, thalassemia and sickle cell disease; and
VIII. multiple disabilities.
The said guidelines for the purpose of assessing disabilities at Annexure II shall supersede the guidelines for evaluation of various disabilities and procedure for certification vide Government of India, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment notification number 16-18/97-NI I. dated the 1st June 2001 and the guidelines for evaluation and assessment of mental illness and procedure of certification vide Government of India, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment notification number 16-18/97-NI dated the 18th February 2002, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such supersession.
Note: In terms of Section 57 of the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016), the State Governments or as the case may be, Union Territory Administrators shall designate persons, having requisite qualifications and experience, as certifying authorities, who shall be competent to issue the certificate of disability and also notify the jurisdiction within which and the terms and conditions subject to which, the certifying authority shall perform its certification functions.
Note: The Director General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India shall be the final authority to decide upon cases where any controversy or doubt arises in matters relating to interpretation of the definitions or classifications or evaluation procedure regarding the said guidelines.
16. The guidelines in Annexure-II to the notification cover various heads of disability including locomotor disability. Some of the relevant provisions under the above head are extracted below:
1.1. Guidelines for Evaluation of Permanent Physical Impairment (PPI) of Upper Extremities
(a) The estimation and measurement shall be made when the clinical condition has reached the stage of maximum improvement from the medical treatment. Normally the time period is to be decided by the medical doctor who is evaluating the case for issuing the PPI Certificate as per standard format of the certificate.
(b) The upper extremity is divided into two component parts; the arm component and the hand component.
(c) Measurement of the loss of function of arm component consists of measuring the loss of range of motion, muscle strength and co-ordinated activities.
(d) Measurement of loss of function of hand component consists of determining the prehension, sensation and strength. For estimation of prehension opposition, lateral pinch, cylindrical grasp, spherical grasp and hook grasp have to be assessed.
(e) The impairment of the entire extremity depends on the combination of the impairments of both components.
(f) Total disability% will not exceed 100%.
(g) Disability is to be certified as whole number and not as a fraction.
(h) Disability is to be certified in relation to that upper extremity.
1.2.1. ARM (UPPER EXTREMITY) COMPONENT
Total value of the arm component is 90%
1.2.2. Principles of evaluation of range of motion (ROM) of joints
(a) The value of maximum ROM in the arm component is 90%
(b) Each of three joints i.e. shoulder, elbow and wrist component was earlier weighed equally-30%. However, functional evaluation in clinical practice indicates greater limitations imposed if hand is involved. So, appropriate weightage is given to involvement of different joints as mentioned below;
Shoulder= up to 20%, Elbow= up to 20%, Wrist= up to 10%, & Hands= up to 40%, dependent upon extent of involvement (mild-less than 1/3, moderate-up to 2/3, or severe-almost total). If more than one joint of the upper extremity is involved, the loss of percentage in each joint is calculated separately as above and then added together.
1.2.3. Principles of evaluation of strength of muscles:
(a) Strength of muscles can be tested by manual method and graded from 0-5 as advocated by Medical Research Council (MRC), London, UK depending upon the strength of the muscles (Appendix-I).
(b) Loss of muscle power can be given percentages as follows:
(i) The mean percentage of loss of muscle strength around a joint is multiplied by 0.30.
(ii) If loss of muscle strength involves more than one joint the mean loss of percentage in each joint is calculated separately and then added together as has been described for loss of motion.
1.2.4. Principles of evaluation of coordinated activities:
(a) The total value for coordinated activities is 90%
(b) Ten different coordinated activities should be tested as given in the Form A. (Appendix II. assessment proforma for upper extremity)
(c) Each activity has a value of 9%
(d) Average normal range of different joints for reference is at Appendix III,
17. Section E contains guidelines for evaluating locomotor disability due to chronic neurological conditions. The medical authority for certification of locomotor disability is to comprise of:
1. The Medical Superintendent or Chief Medical Officer or Civil Surgeon;
2. A Specialist in Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation or Specialist in Orthopedics; and
3. One specialist nominated by the Chief Medical Officer in accordance with the condition of the person with disability.
18. Besides locomotor disability, the guidelines cover visual impairment, hearing impairment, speech and hearing disability, intellectual disability, disability caused due to chronic neurological conditions, disability due to blood disorder and multiple disabilities:
25.2. The disability caused due to chronic neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis, parkinsons disease is multidimensional involving manifestation in muscular skeleton system and also psycho social behaviour. The disability in musculo-skeletal system on account of these conditions shall be assessed in terms of Section E (para 10-10.8 of Annexure II) of these guidelines relating to assessment of locomotor disability due to chronic neurological conditions and the psychosocial disability (mental illness) shall be assessed by using the IDEAS as at Appendix IV. Comprehensive disability on account of these conditions shall then be calculated by using the formula a+ b (90-a)
Where "a" will be the higher score and
And "b" will be the lower score. However, the maximum total percentage of multiple disabilities shall not exceed 100%.
Appendix-II of the guidelines provides a detailed assessment proforma in relation to upper extremities.
19. On 29 August 2018, the MSJE in the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities issued an Office Memorandum. The OM is titled: "Guidelines for conducting written examination for persons with benchmark disabilities". The OM notes that the Department issued guidelines for conducting written examinations for persons with disabilities defined under the erstwhile legislation, namely the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act 199510. These guidelines were issued on 26 February 2013.
20. The guidelines were reviewed under the auspices of a committee which was constituted on the basis of the issues which were raised by the UPSC, among other bodies. In the meantime, the 1995 Act was superseded by the enactment of the RPwD Act, 2016 which came into force on 19 April 2017. The OM states that the RPwD Act, 2016 provides for reservations in government jobs for persons with benchmark disabilities as defined in Section 2(r). Based on the findings of the Committee, the Union government has through the OM laid down revised guidelines "for conducting a written examination for persons with benchmark disabilities" in supersession of the earlier guidelines dated 26 February 2013. The above guidelines which have been notified through the OM dated 29 August 2018 inter alia contain the following stipulations in regard to the provision of scribes to persons with benchmark disabilities:
I. These guidelines may be called as 'Guidelines for conducting written examination for persons with benchmark disabilities 2018.
II. There should be a uniform and comprehensive policy across the country for persons with benchmark disabilities for written examination taking into account improvement in technology and new avenues opened to persons with benchmark disabilities providing a level playing field. Policy should also have flexibility to accommodate the specific needs on case-to-case basis.
III There is no need for fixing separate criteria for regular and competitive examinations.
IV. The facility of Scribe/Reader/Lab Assistant should be allowed to any person with benchmark disability as defined Under Section 2(r) of the RPwD Act, 2016 and has limitation in writing including that of speed if so desired by him/her.
In case of persons with bench mark disabilities in the category of blindness, locomotor disability (both arm affected-BA) and cerebral palsy, the facility of scribe/reader/lab assistant shall be given. If so desired by the person.
In case of other category of persons with benchmark disabilities, the provision of scribe/reader/lab assistant can be allowed on production of a certificate to the effect that the person concerned has physical limitation to write, and scribe is essential to write examination on his behalf, from the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Medical Superintendent of a Government health care institution as per proforma at Appendix-I.
The form of certificate which has been provided in Appendix-I is extracted below:
The above guidelines envisage the provision of a scribe to candidates with benchmark disabilities in written examinations. The policy also recognises that there should be a measure of flexibility to accommodate specific needs on a case-to-case basis. Under the guidelines, the facility of a scribe is envisaged to any person with a benchmark disability as defined Under Section 2(r) and having a limitation in writing, including of speed. Under the guidelines, candidates with benchmark disabilities comprised within the categories of (i) blind candidates; (ii) candidates suffering from locomotor disability (both arms affected); and (iii) cerebral palsy are entitled at their choice to the facility of a scribe or, as the case may be, a reader or lab assistant. In the case of persons falling within other categories of benchmark disabilities a scribe, reader or lab assistant can be allowed upon the production of a certificate that "the person concerned has physical limitation to write and scribe is essential to write examination on his behalf." The certificate has to be issued by the CMO, Civil Surgeon or Medical Superintendent of a government healthcare institution in the proforma appended as Annexure-1.
The important point to note is that the guidelines of the MSJE dated 29 August 2018 recognise the entitlement to a scribe only for candidates with benchmark disabilities. Among them, candidates belonging to three categories-the blind and those with locomotor disability or cerebral palsy-are to be given the facility if so desired. In the case of candidates with other benchmark disabilities, such a facility is to be extended upon a certificate which is issued in terms as noted above.
Following the notification which was issued on 29 August 2018, the Rules for the conduct of CSE were amended. The amended Rules contemplate that:
Candidates must write the papers in their own hand. In no circumstances will they be allowed the help of a scribe to ·write the answers for them. The Persons with Benchmark Disabilities in the categories of blindness, locomotor disability (both arm affected-BA) and cerebral palsy will be provided the facility of scribe, if desired by the person. In case of other category of Persons with Benchmark Disabilities as defined Under Section 2(r) of the RPWD Act, 2016, the facility of scribe will be allowed to such candidates on production of a certificate to the effect that the person concerned has physical limitation to write, and scribe is essential to write examination on behalf from the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Medical Superintendent of a Government Health Care institution as per proforma at Appendix-V. The Persons with Benchmark Disabilities in the category of blindness, locomotor disability (both arm affected-BA) and cerebral palsy will be allowed Compensatory Time of twenty minutes per hour of the examination In case of other categories of Persons with Benchmark disabilities, this facility will be provided on production of a certificate to the effect that the person concerned has physical limitation to write from the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon/Medical Superintendent of a Government Health Care institution as per proforma at Appendix-V.
The above amendment is similar to the guidelines prescribed by the OM dated 29 August 2018.
Now it is in this background that it is necessary to advert briefly to the position which has been adopted on affidavit by the two arms of the Central Government-the MSJE on the one hand and the UPSC on the other hand.
E. Two Government Ministries: A policy disconnect
21. UPSC in its counter affidavit filed through its Joint Secretary states that it conducts the CSE "strictly in accordance with the Rules framed and enacted by the Government of India in the Department of Personnel and Training". It also notices that the provisions of the RPwD Act 2016 are administered by a nodal ministry known as the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment which finalises policies, instructions and guidelines with aid and assistance of experts in the field, for the purpose of extending benefits under the enactment. According to UPSC:
...the Civil Services Examination Rules enacted by the DoPT do not contain a provision for providing any benefit to a candidate suffering from the disability known as writer's cramp or dysgraphia. In fact the Rules enacted by the DoP&T provide the benefit of facility of a scribe to the candidates suffering from benchmark disabilities alone, and no benefit is contemplated under the Rules to the persons who do not suffer from the bench mark disabilities but with some other kind of disabilities.
22. Referring to the OM dated 29 August 2018 issued by the MSJE, the affidavit of UPSC states that these guidelines confine the benefit of a scribe only to persons with benchmark disabilities. The request of the Appellant is stated to have been rejected on the ground that there is an absence of any provision for a scribe to candidates falling in the category in which the Appellant is placed. UPSC in fact states that it does not permit a deviation from the CSE Rules 2018.
Contrasted with the position which has been adopted on affidavit before this Court by the UPSC, a more nuanced view has been suggested by the reply filed on behalf of the MSJE. The Ministry, while reiterating the guidelines which have been framed on 29 August 2018 states that writer's cramp is not specifically included in the list of specified disabilities contained in the Schedule to the RPwD Act, 2016 and "accordingly the guidelines stated above are not applicable to a person suffering from writer's cramp". Having said this, the Ministry states:
G. That it is noteworthy to mention that there are certain other medical conditions which are not identified as disabilities per se but which may have implications hampering the writing capability of a person without manifesting into any specified disability. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the examining body to consider such cases for the purpose of granting scribe, extra time and likewise in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on production of medical certificate similar in line with that of other categories of persons with benchmark disabilities.
23. MSJE is the nodal ministry which is entrusted with implementing the provisions of the RPwD Act, 2016. As the nodal ministry, it has formulated guidelines on 29 August 2018. These guidelines, as we have noticed earlier, confine access to a scribe, reader or lab assistant to candidates having benchmark disabilities within the meaning of Section 2(r). Yet, as the nodal ministry, it recognizes that these guidelines are not exhaustive of the circumstances or conditions in which a scribe can be provided. On the contrary, the MSJE has recognized the prevalence of other medical conditions "not identified as disabilities per se" but which may hamper the writing capability of a person. It specifically leaves it open to every examining body to consider such cases for the grant of scribe, extra time or other facilities in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare against the production of a medical certificate, in line with those prescribed for candidates with benchmark disabilities.
24. This view of the nodal ministry has evidently not percolated to UPSC which, on the other hand, considers itself to be strictly bound, without deviation, from the Rules specified by DoPT for the conduct of the CSE. Notwithstanding the views of the MSJE, the UPSC does not recognize that the guidelines dated 29 August 2018 vest it with the discretion to provide accommodations on a case-by-case basis, beyond those spelt out in the guidelines. The Rules which hold the field are in terms of the guidelines dated 29 August 2018. UPSC has therefore specifically stated before this Court that a candidate who does not fulfill the description of a person with benchmark disabilities would not be entitled to a scribe. These divergent views of two Central Ministries before the Court are symptomatic of a policy disconnect. We express our disquiet about the fact that, in a policy matter with profound consequences for India's disabled population, the left hand does not know what the right one is doing.
F. Benchmark disability not a precondition to obtaining a scribe
25. It is in this backdrop that the Court must resolve the issue, bearing as it does on the rights of similarly situated candidates. The RPwD Act, 2016 embodies two distinct concepts when it speaks of (i) 'persons with benchmark disabilities' and (ii) persons with disability. In defining a person with benchmark disability, Section 2(r) encompasses two categories: (i) a person with not less than 40 per cent of a specified disability, where the specified disability has not been defined in measurable terms and (ii) a person with disability where the specified disability has been defined in measurable terms, as certified by the certifying authority. In other words, Section 2(r) encompasses both a situation where a specified disability has not been defined in measurable terms, in which event it means a person with not less than 40 per cent of the specified disability but also where a specified disability has been defined in measurable terms. A certification by the certifying authority is contemplated in regard to whether the person concerned does in fact meet the specified norm as quantified.
26. The second concept which is embodied in Section 2(s) is that of a person with disability. Section 2(s) unlike Section 2(r) is not tagged either with the notion of a specified disability or a benchmark disability as defined in Section 2(r). Section 2(s) has been phrased by Parliament in broad terms so as to mean a person with a long term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment which in interaction with various barriers hinders full and effective participation in society equally with others.
27. Section 2(s) is significant because it recognizes firstly, the nature of the impairment, secondly, the interconnection of the impairment with various barriers and thirdly, the impact of the impairment in hindering full and effective participation on a footing of equality. On the first aspect namely the nature of the impairment, Section 2(s) requires that the impairment should be long term-physical, mental, intellectual or sensory. The statutory definition has evidently recognized that it is the nature of the impairment in its interaction with barriers that results in the full and effective participation of the person in society equally with others being hampered. Section 2(s) is, in other words, a far-reaching recognition by the legislature of disability as not only a function of a physical or mental impairment but of its interaction with barriers resulting in a social milieu which prevents the realization of full, effective and equal participation in society.
28. Both as a matter of textual construction and bearing in mind the purpose and object underlying the term, it is necessary to emphasise that the definition in Section 2(s) cannot be constricted by the measurable quantifications tagged with the definition Under Section 2(r).
29. The concept of a benchmark disability Under Section 2(r) cannot be conflated with the notion of disability Under Section 2(s). The definition in Section 2(r) applies in the case of a specified disability. The expression 'specified disability' is defined in Section 2(zc) to mean the disabilities as specified in the Schedule. The Schedule to the Act incorporates five specified disabilities:
1. Physical disabilities comprised of
(a) Locomotor disability including
(i) leprosy cured persons
(ii) cerebral palsy
(iii) dwarfism
(iv) muscular dystrophy
(v) acid attack victims;
(b) Visual impairment encompassing
(i) blindness
(ii) low-vision
(c) Hearing impairment
(d) Speech and language disability
2. Intellectual disability including
(a) specific learning disabilities
(b) autism spectrum disorder
3. Mental behavior
4. Disability caused due to
(a) Chronic neurological conditions, such as
(i) multiple sclerosis
(ii) parkinson's disease
(b) Blood disorder
5. Multiple disabilities (more than one of the above specified disabilities).
The Central government has been empowered to notify any other category as a specified disability.
30. The concept of benchmark disabilities under the RPwD Act, 2016 has specifically been adopted in relation with the provisions of Chapter VI and Chapter VII. Chapter VI contains special provisions for persons with benchmark disabilities. Among those provisions is Section 31 (free education for children with benchmark disability), Section 32 (reservation in higher educational institutions), Section 33 (identification of posts for reservation), Section 34 (reservation), Section 36 (Special Employment Exchange) and Section 37 (Special Schemes and Development Programmes). Chapter VII contains special provisions for persons with benchmark disabilities in need of high support. Thus, the concept of benchmark disabilities has been adopted by the legislation bearing in mind specific provisions which are contained in the law for persons meeting this description.
31. Conflating the rights and entitlements which inhere in persons with disabilities with the notion of benchmark disabilities does dis-service to the salutary purpose underlying the enactment of the RPwD Act 2016. Worse still, to deny the rights and entitlements recognized for persons with disabilities on the ground that they do not fulfill a benchmark disability would be plainly ultra vires the RPwD Act 2016.
G. Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016: A paradigm-shift
G.1 A statutory manifestation of a constitutional commitment
32. Part III of our Constitution does not explicitly include persons with disabilities within its protective fold. However, much like their able-bodied counterparts, the golden triangle of Articles 14, 19 and 21 applies with full force and vigour to the disabled. The RPwD Act 2016 seeks to operationalize and give concrete shape to the promise of full and equal citizenship held out by the Constitution to the disabled and to execute its ethos of inclusion and acceptance.
33. The fundamental postulate upon which the RPwD Act 2016 is based is the principle of equality and non-discrimination. Section 3 casts an affirmative obligation on the government to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy (i) the right to equality; (ii) a life with dignity; and (iii) respect for their integrity equally with others. Section 3 is an affirmative declaration of the intent of the legislature that the fundamental postulate of equality and non-discrimination is made available to persons with disabilities without constraining it with the notion of a benchmark disability. Section 3 is a statutory recognition of the constitutional rights embodied in Articles 14, 19 and 21 among other provisions of Part III of the Constitution. By recognizing a statutory right and entitlement on the part of persons who are disabled, Section 3 seeks to implement and facilitate the fulfillment of the constitutional rights of persons with disabilities.
34. There is a critical qualitative difference between the barriers faced by persons with disabilities and other marginalized groups. In order to enable persons with disabilities to lead a life of equal dignity and worth, it is not enough to mandate that discrimination against them is impermissible. That is necessary, but not sufficient. We must equally ensure, as a society, that we provide them the additional support and facilities that are necessary for them to offset the impact of their disability.