MANU/SC/1318/2016
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal Nos. 3545-3549, 3550-3555, 3556-3559, 3560, 3561, 3562, 3563-3566, 3567, 3568, 3569 and 3570 of 2016
Decided On: 18.10.2016
Appellants: Vikas Sankhala and Ors.
Vs.
Respondent: Vikas Kumar Agarwal and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
A.K. Sikri and R.K. Agrawal, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Sushil Kumar Jain, Vivek K. Tankha, Ashwini Kumar Mata, Sr. Advs., Aishwarya Bhati, T. Gopal, Dilip Kumar Nayak, Shiv Avtar Singh, Irshad Ahmad, Anurag Rawat, Sudhir Kumar Gupta, Naresh Kaushik, Vardhman Kaushik, Manoj Joshi, Lalita Kaushik, Christi Jain, Abhinav Gupta, P. Jain, Ankita Gupta, Manu Maheshwari, Vigyan Shah, Pratibha Jain, Puneet Jain, Kamlesh Sharma, Rakesh Dahiya, Hanuman Singh, Sachin Pujari, Rishabh Sancheti, T. Mahipal, P.K. Mohapatra, Milind Kumar and Rahul Verma, Advs.
For Respondents/Defendant: S.S. Shamshery, AAG, Mahima Gupta, Kirti Man Singh, Gopal Singh, Irshad Ahmad, H.D. Thanvi, Sarad Kumar Singhania, Gopal Sankaranarayanan, Shobhit Tiwari, Lal Pratap Singh, Umesh Pratap Singh, Vikram Singh Arya, R.C. Kohli, Pradeep Aggarwal, Brijesh Kumar Singh, Amit Sharma, Ishu Prayas, Ruchi Kohli, Gaurav Sharma, Dhawal Mohan, Vara Gaur and Ajay Choudhary, Advs.
Subject: Service
Subject: Constitution
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 - Section 23, Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 - Section 23(1), Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 - Section 23(2), Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 - Section 24, Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 - Section 25, Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 - Section 26, Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act 2009 - Section 27; Constitution (Eighty-Sixth Amendment) Act, 2002;Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and full Participation) Act, 1995 [Repealed] - Section 2; Constitution of India - Article 14, Constitution of India - Article 15, Constitution of India - Article 15(1), Constitution of India - Article 15(2), Constitution of India - Article 15(4), Constitution of India - Article 16, Constitution of India - Article 16(1), Constitution of India - Article 16(4), Constitution of India - Article 21A, Constitution of India - Article 23, Constitution of India - Article 24, Constitution of India - Article 35, Constitution of India - Article 41, Constitution of India - Article 38, Constitution of India - Article 39, Constitution of India - Article 45, Constitution of India - Article 46; National Council for Teacher Education (Recognition Norms and Procedure) Regulations, 2009
Cases Referred:
Unni Krishnan, J.P. and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0333/1993 : (1993) 1 SCC 645; State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr. v. Kumari Nivedita Jain and Ors. MANU/SC/0093/1981 : (1981) 4 SCC 296; M. Nagaraj and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/4560/2006 : (2006) 8 SCC 212; Dr. Jagadish Saran and Ors. v. Union of India MANU/SC/0067/1980 : (1980) 2 SCC 768; State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas MANU/SC/0479/1975 : (1976) 2 SCC 310; K. Manjusree v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr. MANU/SC/0925/2008 : (2008) 3 SCC 512; Vijendra Kumar Verma v. Public Service Commission, Uttarakhand and Ors. MANU/SC/0808/2010 : (2011) 1 SCC 150; Jitendra Kumar Singh and Anr. v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0032/2010 : (2010) 3 SCC 119
Case Category:
SERVICE MATTERS - RECRUITMENT/TRANSFER/COMPASSIONATE APPOINTMENT
Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.07.2013 of the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur Bench Jaipur in D.B. Civil Special Appeal (Writ) Nos. 1476, 1470, 1496, 1502 and 1518 of 2012
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  5

Mentioned
  3

Case Note:
Service - Qualifying marks - Concession therein - Candidates belonging to reserved category were to be given 10 percent relaxation in pass marks - Reserved category persons were found eligible and selected - Candidates belonging to general category challenged their selection - Single Judge held that order of State Government could not be allowed to stand as relaxation in qualifying marks was not legal - State could not show any extant reservation policy warranting that concession - State Government and persons belonging to reserved categories, whose selection was set aside challenged said decision - Though Division Bench did not agree with some of reasons given by Single Judge, it dismissed appeals by given its own reasons - Hence, present appeals - Whether policy of State as reflected in its letter deciding to give relaxation ranging from 10 percent to 20 percent in Teacher Eligibility Test (TET) marks to different reserved categories was valid - Whether National Council for Teacher Education notification, which amends paragraph 3 of its earlier guidelines, provides 5 percent relaxation to the reserved category for passing TET - Whether reserved category candidates, who secured better than general category candidates in recruitment examination, could be denied migration to general seats on basis that they had availed relaxation in TET

Facts:

As per the communication/order of the State Government, candidates belonging to reserved category and women belonging to general category were to be given 10 percent relaxation in pass marks in Teacher Eligibility Test (TET). Those belonging to these categories who secured 50% marks were treated as having qualified TET. They were allowed to appear in the selection process. Many such persons were found eligible and selected. They were given appointment orders and were also issued joining orders. The candidates belonging to the general category filed the petitions in the High Court challenging their selection on the ground that minimum percentage for passing TET was 60% and, therefore, all those candidates belonging to the reserved categories who secured less than 60% in TET could not be declared as having passed TET and were, therefore, ineligible to participate in the selection process. The Single Judge partly allowed the petitions by holding that the order of the State Government could not be allowed to stand as the relaxation in qualifying marks was not legal or valid. It was also held that as per guidelines contained in letter issued by the National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE), concession could be given to persons belonging to reserved category only in accordance with their extant reservation policy and insofar as the State was concerned, it could not show any "extant" reservation policy warranting that concession. The State Government and persons belonging to reserved categories, whose selection was set aside challenged the said decision by filing appeals before the Division Bench. Though the Division Bench did not agree with some of the reasons given by the Single Judge, it dismissed all the appeals by given its own reasons. Hence, the present appeals by the State Government as well as the selected candidates belonging to the reserved category.

Held, while disposing off the appeals:

(i) The contention of the Respondents that the provision for relaxation upto 5% in qualifying marks at all relates to TET, was unacceptable. The NCTE had not provided any provision for relaxation in TET examination for reserved category candidates but had left it to the State Governments to do the needful in this behalf, as per para 9 of guidelines which remained unaltered. [32] and[33]

(ii) As far as relaxation in passing TET was concerned, same was governed by para 9 of notification issued by the NCTE. The State Government could not show any such policy which existed prior to the issuing communication regarding concession to be given to the reserved category persons. That was the reason for the High Court to hold that there was no "extant" policy of the State Government for giving relaxation to reserved category candidates. [34] and[36]

(iii) Only those candidates belonging to reserved category who are found meritorious in selection were ultimately appointed. The two constitutional goals, that of rendering quality education on the one hand and providing "equality of opportunity" to the unprivileged class on the other hand, were adequately met and rightly balanced. The present Court did not agree with the interpretation that was given by the High Court and held that relaxation prescribed in letter in pass marks in TET examination for different reserved categories mentioned therein was legal and valid in law. [54] and[55]

(iv) A person who passes TET examination becomes eligible to participate in the selection process as and when such selection process for filling up of the posts of primary teachers is to be undertaken by the State. On the other hand, when it comes to recruitment of teachers, the method for appointment of teachers is altogether different. Here, merit list of successful candidates is to be prepared on the basis of marks obtained under different heads. One of the heads is marks in TET. So far as this head is concerned, 20% of the marks obtained in TET are to be assigned to each candidate. Therefore, those reserved category candidates who secured lesser marks in TET would naturally get less marks under this head. [60]

(v) No concession becomes available to the reserved category candidate by giving relaxation in pass marks in TET insofar as recruitment process is concerned. It only enables them to compete with others by allowing them to participate in the selection process. In this backdrop, irrespective of circular, the reserved category candidates who secured more marks than marks obtained by the last candidate selected in general category, would be entitled to be considered against unreserved category vacancies. However, it would be subject to the condition that these candidates have not availed any other concession in terms of number of attempts, etc., except on fee and age. [61]

(vi) Those reserved category candidates who secured pass marks on the application of relaxed standards as contained in the extant policy of the Government in its communication to be treated as having qualified TET examination and, thus, eligible to participate in the selection undertaken by the State Government. Migration from reserved category to general category shall be admissible to those reserved category candidates who secured more marks obtained by the last unreserved category candidates who are selected, subject to the condition that such reserved category candidates did not avail any other special concession. The concession of passing marks in TET would not be treated as concession falling in the aforesaid category. [63]
Disposition:
Appeal Allowed
JUDGMENT
A.K. Sikri, J.
1. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the 'RTE Act') recognises one of the most profound underlying principle contained in the Constitution, viz. the crucial role of universal elementary education for strengthening the social fabric of democracy through provision of equal opportunities to all has been accepted, since inception of our Republic. Other, and equally significant principle that it recognises, is that, in order to ensure equal opportunities to all citizens, it is necessary that elementary education is provided to one and all. Keeping in view this spirit, obligation was imposed upon the State, as per Article 41, read with Article 45, of the Constitution to make effective provisions for securing the right to education, among other. Thus, it is one of the Directive Principles of State Policy enumerated in the Constitution that the State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children. In order to make it a reality, this Court in the case of Unni Krishnan, J.P. and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. MANU/SC/0333/1993 : (1993) 1 SCC 645 stretched the limits of Article 45 by reading right to free education as a fundamental right of children upto the age of 14 years so as to enable the children up to the age of 14 years to receive the education as a matter of right. Law Commission also supported it by making recommendation1 to the Parliament to make suitable amendment in the Constitution. Realising its constitutional commitment, the Parliament obliged, and Article 21-A was added vide the Constitution (Eighty Sixth Amendment) Act, 2002 in the following manner:
Article 21-A. Right to education.-The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.
Simultaneously, Article 45 of the Constitution was also substituted with the following Article:
Article 45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of six years.-The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six years.
2. Notwithstanding the aforesaid provisions in the Constitution and significant spatial and numerical expansion of elementary schools in the country, goal of universal education continued to allude us. It was found that number of children, particularly children from disadvantaged groups and weaker sections, who drop out of school before completing elementary education, remain very large. It was also noticed that the quality of learning achievement is not always entirely satisfactory even in the case of children who complete elementary education. Having regard to the aforesaid harsh realities, the Parliament enacted the RTE Act with following objects in mind:
(a) that every child has a right to be provided full time elementary education of satisfactory and equitable quality in a formal school which satisfies certain essential norms and standards;
(b) 'compulsory education' casts an obligation on the appropriate Government to provide and ensure admission, attendance and completion of elementary education;
(c) 'free education' means that no child, other than a child who has been admitted by his or her parents to a school which is not supported by the appropriate Government, shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may prevent him or her from pursuing and completing elementary education;
(d) the duties and responsibilities of the appropriate Government, local authorities, parents, schools and teachers in providing free and compulsory education; and
(e) a system for protection of the right of children and a decentralized grievance redressal mechanism.
3. It hardly needs to be emphasized that for turning the provision of every child to have free and compulsory education into reality, not only sufficient number of schools are required with all necessary facilities and infrastructure, adequate and qualified teaching staff shall also be needed to fulfill this noble purpose. It is for this reason that apart from other provisions in the RTE Act, provisions like Sections 23 to 27 are inserted in the said Act to cater this requirement.
4. For the purpose of present appeals, it is not necessary to refer to each of these provisions. As we are concerned with the educational and other qualifications that are needed for appointment of the teaching staff, the provision directly touching upon this aspect is Section 23 of the RTE Act, which reads as under:
23. Qualifications for appointment and terms and conditions of service of teachers: (1) Any person possessing such minimum qualifications, as laid down by an academic authority, authorised by the Central Government, by notification, shall be eligible for appointment as a teacher.
(2) Where a State does not have adequate institutions offering courses or training in teacher education, or teachers possessing minimum qualifications as laid down Under Sub-section (1) are not available in sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, if it deems necessary, by notification, relax the minimum qualifications required for appointment as a teacher, for such period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified in that notification:
Provided that a teacher who, at the commencement of this Act, does not possess minimum qualifications as laid down Under Sub-section (1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications within a period of five years.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service of, teachers shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. Since minimum qualifications are to be laid down by an academic authority authorised by the Central Government by notification, such an authority which is so authorised by the Central Government is the National Council for Teacher Education (for short, 'NCTE'). Thus, NCTE is competent to lay down the minimum qualifications which a person needs to possess to make him eligible for appointment as a teacher.
6. NCTE fulfilled this obligation in the form of Notification dated August 23, 2010, published on August 25, 2010 in the Gazette of India, whereunder minimum qualifications for appointment as teachers were laid down. Apart from other educational qualifications prescribed therein, the said Notification also mandates passing of Teacher Eligibility Test (for short, 'TET') and reads as follows:
Pass in the Teacher Eligibility Test (TET), TO BE CONDUCTED BY THE APPROPRIATE Government in accordance with the Guidelines framed by the NCTE for the purpose.
7. As is clear from the above, such a TET is to be conducted by the appropriate State Government, i.e. respective State Governments, though in accordance with the guidelines framed by NCTE for this purpose. It may also be mentioned at this stage that passing of the said TET is a mandatory condition without which a candidate is not eligible to participate in the recruitment process for appointment as a teacher. NCTE also formulated the guidelines, which were forwarded by it to the Secretaries/Commissioners of Education of State Government/Union Territories vide its letter dated February 11, 2011. In these guidelines, it was specified that the minimum pass percentage of TET is 60. At the same time, it enabled the State Governments to give concessions to persons belonging to SC/ST, OBC, differently abled persons etc. 'in accordance with their extant reservation policy'. Para 9 of these guidelines stipulating the aforesaid conditions reads as under:
Qualifying marks-
9. A person who scores 60% or more in the TET exam will be considered as TET pass. School managements (Government, local bodies, government aided and unaided)
(a) may consider giving concessions to persons belonging to SC/ST, OBC, differently abled persons, etc., in accordance with their extant reservation policy;
(b) should give weightage to the TET scores in the recruitment process; however, qualifying the TET would not confer a right on any person for recruitment/employment as it is only one of the eligibility criteria for appointment.
In para 9, the extent of percentage to which the relaxation could be granted in the qualifying marks for TET was not stipulated and it was mentioned that the State Governments could give such concessions in accordance with their extant reservation policy.
8. Para 3 mentions about the training which was to be undergone by a person. It would be apposite to reproduce this para as it has some bearing for the purposes of the instant appeals. The same is as under:
3. Training to be undergone.-A person-
(a) with B.A./B.Sc. with at least 50% marks and B.Ed. qualification shall also be eligible for appointment for Class I to V up to 1st January, 2012, provided he undergoes, after appointment, an NCTE recognised 6 month special programme in Elementary Education.
(b) with D.Ed. (Special Education) or B.Ed. (Special Education) qualification shall undergo, after appointment, an NCTE recognised 6 month special programme in Elementary Education.
9. Subsequently, vide Notification dated July 29, 2011, the aforesaid letter dated February 11, 2011 was amended. It, inter alia, prescribed that relaxation up to 5% in the qualifying marks to the candidates belonging to reserved categories could be accorded.
10. New para 3 of the Notification dated February 11, 2011, substituted in place of original para 3, is to the following effect:
III. For para 3 of the Principal Notification the following shall be substituted, namely:
(i) Training to be undergone.-A person-
(a) with Graduation with at least 50% marks and B.Ed. qualification with at least 45% marks and 1 year Bachelor in Education (B.Ed.), in accordance with the NCTE (Recognition Norms and Procedure) Regulations issued from time to time in this regard, shall also be eligible for appointment to Class I to V up to 1st January, 2012, provided he/she undergoes, after appointment as NCTE recognized 6 month Special Programme in Elementary Education;
(b) With D.Ed. (Special Education) or B.Ed. (Special Education) qualification shall undergo, after appointment an NCTE recognised 6 month Special Programme in Elementary Education.
(ii) Reservation Policy:
Relaxation up to 5% in the qualifying marks shall be allowed to the candidates belonging to reserved categories, such as SC/ST/OBC/PH.
This amendment has given rise to another incidental but connected issue, viz. whether 5% relaxation relates to the pass marks which are to be attained in TET exam? We shall advert to this and other questions, falling for our determination, at the appropriate stage. Since we are now stating the events leading to the dispute, let us complete this narration of facts, here.
11. After the issuance of the Notification dated February 11, 2011 by the NCTE, the State Government herein, i.e. the State of Rajasthan, issued the letter dated March 23, 2011 to the concerned authorities conveying its decision to grant relaxation in minimum pass marks in the TET to reserved category candidates in the following manner:
(a) 10% to persons belonging to SC, ST, OBC, SBC and all women belonging to the general category.
(b) 15% to all women belonging to SC, ST, OBC, SBC and widowed and divorced women.
(c) 20% to persons covered under the definition of "persons with disability" under Clause (t) of Section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
12. As per the aforesaid communication dated March 23, 2011 of the State Government, candidates belonging to SC/ST, OBC, SBC and women belonging to General category were to be given 10% relaxation in pass marks in TET. Thus, those belonging to these categories who secured 50% marks were treated as having qualified TET. They were allowed to appear in the selection process which was undertaken thereafter some time in June 2012 and results thereof were declared in August 2012. Many such persons were found eligible and selected at different districts in the State of Rajasthan. They were given appointment orders and were also issued joining orders.
13. At this stage, many candidates belonging to the General category filed writ petitions in the High Court of Rajasthan challenging their selection on the ground that minimum percentage for passing TET was 60% and, therefore, all those candidates belonging to the reserved categories who secured less than 60% in TET could not be declared as having passed TET and were, therefore, ineligible to participate in the selection process. Ultimately, the learned Single Judge of the High Court decided all these writ petitions vide common judgment dated October 06, 2012 thereby partly allowing the said writ petitions and holding that the order dated March 23, 2011 of the State Government could not be allowed to stand as the relaxation/concession in qualifying marks was not legal or valid. It was also held that as per para 9 of the guidelines contained in letter dated February 11, 2011 issued by the NCTE, concession could be given to persons belonging to SC/ST, OBC, differently abled persons, etc. only 'in accordance with their extant reservation policy' and insofar as the State of Rajasthan is concerned, it could not show any "extant" reservation policy warranting this concession. The State Government challenged the said decision by filing appeals before the Division Bench. Likewise, persons belonging to reserved categories who had been selected and their selection set aside by the learned Single Judge, also preferred appeals. In all, 29 appeals were filed which have been decided by a common judgment dated July 02, 2013 by the Division Bench of the High Court. Though the Division Bench did not agree with some of the reasons given by the learned Single Judge, it dismissed all the appeals by given its own reasons. It is in this backdrop that the State Government as well as the selected candidates belonging to the reserved category have felt aggrieved by the impugned decision making the same subject matter of the present appeals.
14. Some developments which have taken place after the filing of various special leave petitions may also be noted at this stage.
15. Vide order dated July 26, 2013, this Court's order in SLP(C) No. 23508 of 2013 stayed the operation of the impugned judgment for three months. In the meanwhile, State of Rajasthan started fresh process for recruitment of teachers by advertisement dated September 04, 2013 (subject to decision of this Court). District-wise written examination was held for recruitment of the year 2013 for total 20,000 posts. The reserved category candidates who had passed TET in 2011 with relaxations as per State policy dated March 23, 2011, applied in the recruitment of 2013. During the pendency of the matter before this Court, appointments were made by the respective local bodies with respect to recruitment of 2012 giving relaxation in accordance with the State policy dated March 23, 2011 and also allowing migration as per policy dated May 11, 2011 subject to decision of this Court.
The participants of reserved category candidates in recruitment process of 2012 and 2013 preferred SLP(C) No. 31109 of 2014 wherein this Court issued notice and allowed the Appellant Nos. 8 to 13 belonging to 2013 recruitment, to file SLP. In March, 2015, result declared with regard to recruitment of 2013 giving relaxation in accordance with State policy dated March 23, 2011. However, appointments are not given to reserved category candidates availing relaxation although seats have been kept vacant. Moreover, migration to general seats was not allowed. The Appellant in SLP(C) No. 31109 of 2014 belonging to 2013 recruitment moved I.A. No. 14 of 2015 seeking direction to the State to prepare merit list of 2013 recruitment in the same manner as done in 2012 recruitment giving benefit of relaxation and migration. In fact, after 2011, TET was again conducted by the State in 2012. The reserved category candidates who had passed TET with relaxations in 2011 did not appear in 2012 TET since they were declared pass in 2011 TET itself otherwise they would have availed the opportunity to improve their TET scores by appearing in TET in 2012.
16. We may point out at the outset that insofar as issue of concession/relaxation in TET is concerned, it has three facets, viz.:
(i) whether relaxation in passing marks for TET was validly given by the State Government in its letter dated March 23, 2011 and all such candidates belonging to the reserved categories can be treated as having passed TET on obtaining marks as per relaxed standards?
(ii) whether no relaxation of any nature could be given by the State Government and, therefore, it was incumbent upon the persons belonging to reserved categories as well to secure 60% marks in TET to treat them as qualifying the said TET?
OR
(ii) relaxation to the extent of 5% was permissible, as provided by NCTE vide its amendment Notification dated July 29, 2011 and, therefore, those who secure 55% or above could be treated as successful in TET?
17. Insofar as General category candidates are concerned, who were the writ Petitioners in the High Court, they maintained that minimum qualifying marks were 60% in the absence of any extant reservation policy granting such concession. According to them, the State Government could not produce any such policy before the High Court and even before us and it was accepted that there was no such policy.
18. Insofar as candidates belonging to the reserved categories are concerned, they are divided into two groups. Many of these candidates got 55% and above in TET. They argued that as far as concession given by the State Government as per its decision dated March 23, 2011 is concerned, the same is not warranted and relaxation up to 5% only could be given in view of the amendment Notification dated July 29, 2011. On this premise, they want to oust all those candidates who have secured less than 55% marks in TET with the plea that reserved category candidates belonging to their group (those who secured 55% or more marks in TET) be treated as eligible and posts meant for reserved categories be filled up accordingly. It may be mentioned that many candidates in their group are below in merit list drawn after the selection than those reserved category candidates who secured less than 55% marks in TET and, therefore, are not selected. If the other group is excluded from the selection as ineligible, candidates from this group may succeed in getting the berth. So their endeavour is to oust such other group with marks lesser than 55% in TET so that they are able to get in. On the other hand, those candidates from reserved categories who have secured less than 55% marks in TET but are found eligible in terms of relaxation give vide the State Government's decision dated March 23, 2011 and have emerged successful in the selection have taken the position that the said relaxation given by the State Government is valid and legal.
19. We may also pointed out at this stage itself that the State Government has stood by its decision dated March 23, 2011.
20. There is yet another issue which was raised in the High Court by the writ Petitioners (candidates belonging to general category) and has been decided by the High Court in their favour. As there is challenge to the findings on that issue as well in these appeals, we would like to spell out the said issue with necessary details.
21. It so happened that many candidates who belonged to reserved category got higher marks than the last candidates from the general category who was selected for the appointment in the said recruitment process. In terms of its various circulars, which we shall refer to at the appropriate stage, such reserved category candidates who emerged more meritorious than the general category candidates were allowed to migrate in general category. Effect thereof was that these candidates though belonging to reserved category occupied the post meant for general category. According to the writ Petitioners (Respondents herein), it was impermissible as these reserved category candidates got selected after availing certain concessions and, therefore, there was no reason to allow them to shift to general category. The High Court has accepted this plea treating the relaxation in pass marks in TET as concession availed by the reserved category candidates in the selection process.