MANU/SC/0811/2009
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
Civil Appeal No. 3572 of 2009 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6977 of 2007) and Civil Appeal No. 3573 of 2009 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 9988 of 2007)
Decided On: 14.05.2009
Appellants: Villianur Iyarkkai Padukappu Maiyam
Vs.
Respondent: Union of India (UOI) and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
K.G. Balakrishnan, C.J., P. Sathasivam and J.M. Panchal, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Rajeev Dhawan, Sr. Adv., Nikhil Nayyar, T.V.S. Raghavendra Sreyas, Ambuj Agrawal, Pallavi Mohan and Sanjay Parikh, Advs
For Respondents/Defendant: G.E. Vahanvati, Sol. Genl. of India, Dandapani, C. Aryama Sundaram, Sr. Advs., V.G. Pragasam, Chinmoy Pradip Sharma, S. Joseph Aristotle, Prabu Ramasubramanian, A.K. De, Debasis Misra, Rohini Musa, Abhishek Gupta, Zafar Inayat, Anandh Kannan, Advs. for P.V. Yogeswaran, Adv.
Subject: Civil
Subject: Commercial
Catch Words
Mentioned IN
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Constitution Of India - Article 162, Constitution Of India - Article 21, Constitution Of India - Article 239, Constitution Of India - Article 239A, Constitution Of India - Article 240; Government Of Union Territories Act, 1963 - Section 18, Government Of Union Territories Act, 1963 - Section 46, Government Of Union Territories Act, 1963 - Section 50; Indian Ports Act, 1908 - Section 3(9); Pondicherry (administration) Act, 1962 - Section 5; Pondicherry (alteration Of Name) Act, 2006 - Section 4
Relevant Section:
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 - Section 18; Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 - Section 46, Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 - Section 50; Indian Ports Act, 1908 - Section 3(9)
Cases Referred:
BALCO Employees' Union (Regd.) v. Union of India MANU/SC/0779/2001
Prior History:
From the Judgment/Order dated 10.08.2006 of the Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Madras in W.P. No. 12337 of 2006
Disposition:
Appeal Dismissed
Citing Reference:


Discussed
  1

Case Note:
Commercial - Development of Pondicherry port - Contract awarded to one participating party, Respondent No. 11 herein - Selection procedure challenged by the Appellant on the on ground of it being arbitrary and done with oblique motive - Held, Appellants could not specify either in the petitions filed before the High Court or in the memorandum of appeals as to which member of the expert committee or which official of the Government was interested in awarding Letter of Intent to Respondent No. 11 for oblique motives - Government of Pondicherry advertised three times calling for Expression of Interest from the interested firms and had identified Respondent No. 11 for development of the Port after adopting transparent procedure - Events leading to the award of Letter of Intent to the Respondent No. 11 does not indicate, in any manner that the Government had acted arbitrarily or that the Letter of Intent was issued to favour the Respondent No. 11 with oblique motives - Appeals dismissed

Commercial - Award of Contract to Private party - Development of Pondicherry port facilities - Applicability of Indian Major Ports Act, 1908 - Necessity of Prior approval from Central Government - Held, the Pondicherry Port is not a "major port" and as such jurisdiction and control to develop the said port vests in the Government of Pondicherry - Extension of law to Indian Major Ports Act, 1908 would only mean that a particular law is prevalent but its applicability would be dependant upon as to whether facts and circumstances warrant its invocation - Conjoint reading of Article 239 and 239A and Sections 46, 50 of the Government of Union Territories Act read with Rule 5 of the Rules of Business show that the Government of Pondicherry has to take prior approval of the Central Government shows that letter of intent not beyond jurisdiction0 - Appeal Dismissed

Constitution - Judicial Review - Scope thereof - Held, non-floating of tenders or not holding of public auction would not be in all cases be deemed to be the result of the exercise of the executive power in an arbitrary manner - When any State land is intended to be transferred or the State largesse decided to be conferred, resort should be had to public auction or transfer by way of inviting tenders from the people - Scope of judicial review limited in matters of policy decision and economic tests - Interference by Court only if decision contrary to statutory provision or the Constitution - No interference by court with economic decision taken by the State - Court cannot examine the relative merits of different economic policies and cannot strike down the same merely on ground that another policy would have been fairer and better - Appeal Dismissed

Constitution - Maintainability of Public Interest Litigation - Development of Pondicherry port facilities - Contract awarded to Respondent No. 11 herein - Selection procedure challenged by Appellant - Locus standi of Appellant questioned - Held, only ground on which the Appellants could have maintained a PIL before the High Court was to seek protection of the interest of the people of Pondicherry by safeguarding the environment - This issue was raised by the Appellants before the High Court and the High Court has issued directions regarding the same - Once direction were issued by the Court the element of public interest of the Appellants' case no longer survived - Appellants cannot, therefore, proceed to challenge the Award of the Contract in favour of the Respondent No. 11 on other grounds as this would amount to challenging the policy decision of the Government of Pondicherry through a PIL, which is not permissible - Contract assailed by the Appellant purely commercial in nature - Neither the parties which had participated in the process of selection nor one of those who had expressed desire to develop the Port but was not selected came forward to challenge the selection procedure or selection of Respondent No. 11 - Appeals dismissed

Civil - Filing Procedure - List of events and dates - Clause (b) of Rule 4(1) of Order XVI of the Supreme Court Rules, 1960 - Held, to enable the Court to know the factual background, in the absence of records, Order XVI Rule 4(1)(b) requires a list of dates in chronological order with relevant material facts or events pertaining to each of the dates to be furnished along with the special leave petition - In practice, the list of dates is prefaced by a brief synopsis of facts to give a complete and coherent picture of the facts - In the instant case in the special leave petitions, the synopsis/list of dates filed suffers from the defect of filing of a list of dates without relevant material facts/events or synopsis - Such defects resulted in defeating the very purpose of requiring the filing of synopsis/list of dates and would have resulted into unintended miscarriage of justice - Filing of inaccurate and incomplete list of dates caused confusion necessitating detailed reference to the facts carved out from the pleadings of the parties before the High Court and the Apex Court - List of events submitted on behalf of the Appellants cannot be termed as accurate and such a practice of filing of incomplete/inaccurate list of events cannot be approved - Appeal Dismissed
Ratio Decidendi:
"There is a very limited scope of judicial review in matters pertaining to policy making or economic policies can only interfere when the policies are contrary to statutory provision or the constitution of India."
Case Category:
LETTER PETITION AND PIL MATTER - SLPs FILED AGAINST JUDGMENTS/ORDERS PASSED BY THE HIGH COURTS IN WRIT PETITIONS FILED AS PIL
JUDGMENT
J.M. Panchal, J.
1. Leave granted in both the special leave petitions.
2. Appeal arising from Special Leave Petition (C) No. 9988 of 2007 is directed against judgment dated August 10, 2006, rendered by the Division Bench of Judicature at Madras, in Writ Petition No. 3304 of 2006 by which three prayers made by the appellant to quash (1) the Letter of Intent dated June 3, 2005 granted by the Government of Pondicherry to the respondent No. 11 herein, i.e., M/s. Subhash Project and Marketing Limited, for development of port in Pondicherry on Build Operate and Transfer (`BOT' for short) basis, (2) approval dated January 21, 2006 accorded by the Lt. Governor of Pondicherry to the detailed project report dated November 16, 2005 submitted by the respondent No. 11 and its partner M/s. Om Metals Limited for the development of Pondicherry Port on BOT basis as well as to the concession agreement to be entered into between the Government of Pondicherry and the respondent No. 11 with its consortium/partner M/s. Om Metals Limited and with their affiliates for the development of the Pondicherry Port and all related and ancillary/other activities and (3) direction dated January 24, 2006, issued by the Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry, Port Department, to the officers concerned, to prepare a list of all the existing moveable/immovable assets of the Pondicherry Port for handing over to the respondent No. 11 by January 30, 2006, consequent upon the decision taken by the Government of Pondicherry for the development of Pondicherry Port on BOT basis, are rejected.
3. Appeal arising from Special Leave Petition (C) No. 6977 of 2007 is also directed against judgment dated August 10, 2006, mentioned above, rendered in Writ Petition No. 12337 of 2006, by which two prayers made by the appellant to quash (1) the approval dated January 21, 2006 accorded by the Lt. Governor of Pondicherry to the detailed project report dated November 16, 2005, submitted by the respondent No. 11 and its partner M/s. Om Metals Limited, for the development of Pondicherry Port on BOT basis as well as to the concession agreement to be entered into between the Government of Pondicherry and the respondent No. 11 with its consortium/partner M/s. Om Metals Limited and with their affiliates for the development of Pondicherry Port and all related and ancillary/other activities and (2) the direction dated January 24, 2006, issued by the Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry, Port Department, to the officers concerned to prepare a list of all the existing moveable/immovable assets of the Pondicherry Port for handing over the same to the respondent No. 11 by January 30, 2006 pursuant to the decision taken by the Government of Pondicherry for the development of Pondicherry Port on BOT basis, are rejected.
4. As both the appeals arise from the common judgment delivered by the Madras High Court on August 10, 2006 and common question of facts and law arise for consideration of this Court, it is proposed to dispose them of by this common judgment.
5. In order to trace the development of events leading to filing of these appeals, it is necessary to notice certain basic facts.
6. Background
The existing Port of Pondicherry is situated in the East Coast of India between two Major Ports of India, i.e., Madras and Tuticorin. It is located at the Ariankuppam River Mouth in Pondicherry.
The history of the Pondicherry Port dates back to the tenth century A.D. The Pondicherry Port flourished as a centre for international trade and commerce. However, it could not maintain the pace of augmentation in improving the port facilities with respect to the rapid changes in transport technology. Therefore, the port facilities became obsolete and the Port lost much of its importance.
With the objective of developing the port facilities, offers from various Marine Technical Consultancy Firms were invited by the Government of Pondicherry in the year 1973 for the preparation of a Master Plan and a detailed project report. After examining the offers received from various firms, the Port Department of Government of Pondicherry recommended that the project be awarded to M/s. Consulting Engineers Services (India) Pvt. Ltd. By Government order dated September 27, 1973 the said organization was entrusted with the work of preparation of the Master Plan and a detailed project report. The said organization submitted various reports and finally updated its project report in May, 1982. On the basis of the reports, the Ministry of Shipping and Transportation (Ports Wing), Government of India approved the project for the creation of certain facilities at the Pondicherry Port and sanctioned the cost of the project by letter dated June 26, 1984. The Government of Pondicherry entered into an agreement with M/s. Consulting Engineering Services (India) Private Limited on January 22, 1985 for development of the facilities in terms of the approval and sanction granted by the Government of India. During the construction of the facilities, there was a proposal to create additional development facilities for Commercial-cum-Fishing Vessels.
The creation of these additional facilities was discussed in a meeting held on March 22, 1989 pursuant to which the Director (Ports), Port Department, Government of Pondicherry vide letter dated March 23, 1989 informed the Development Commissioner, Government of Pondicherry that creation of such additional facilities would require a feasibility report. In the said letter it was also stated that since the Port Department lacked competent personnel in this regard, the same should be got prepared by a body having the requisite expertise. It was also mentioned in the letter that M/s. Consulting Engineering Services (India) Private Limited had no requisite expertise and recommended the appointment of M/s. Rail India Technical and Economic Services India Limited, a Government of India undertaking under the Ministry of Railways ("M/s. RITES India Limited" for short) to conduct the study on the technical feasibility and economic viability of the proposed development facilities. This proposal was examined and approved by various officials including the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry on March 27, 1989 and the then Lt. Governor, Pondicherry on March 28, 1989. In terms of those decisions, a Government order dated May 29, 1989 was issued by the Government of Pondicherry sanctioning a techno-economic survey to be conducted by M/s. RITES India Limited.
On June 10, 1991, M/s. RITES India Limited submitted its Techno-Economic Feasibility Study Report pertaining to the Development of the additional facilities at Ariankuppam Port Project. The said report noticed that the proposed development was not only necessary for bridging the gap of technological changes in the sea transport, but was also necessary from the socio-economic point of view. In the report it was mentioned that the investments in the proposed project was justified. By the said report a study to be done on the ways and means of raising the funds for the project was recommended. The report also pointed out that Environmental Impact Assessment for the proposed development indicated that the effect on the environment was not significant and would be well within the acceptable levels specified as per the Indian standards.
In spite of the positive Feasibility Study Report submitted by M/s. RITES India Limited, the project could not be carried forward in view of the paucity of funds.
Again, some time in March 1996 the Government of Pondicherry made further attempt to develop the Port by inviting the officials of M/s. RITES India Limited to examine and provide consultancy services by privatization of the ports at Pondicherry, Karaikal and Mahe. Accordingly, a meeting was held between the officials of Government and the Company on March 12, 1996. In the said meeting the officials of M/s. RITES India Limited suggested that appropriate approach was to adopt the Build, Own, Share and Transfer mode of privatization. In terms of the said meeting M/s. RITES India Limited, through a letter dated March 12, 1996, submitted a `Terms of Reference' for offering consultancy assignment for privatization of aforementioned ports. The total consultancy fee for the assignments was initially put as Rs. 30 lakhs, which was reduced to Rs. 20 lakhs as the proposal for consultancy was subsequently limited to the Pondicherry Port only. The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport, Government of India, vide letter dated March 22, 1996 informed the Chief Secretary, Pondicherry Administration about the need to expand the existing capacity of the Pondicherry Port to meet the growth requirement of traffic handled by various major ports. In the said letter it was mentioned that a decision was taken to invite capital participation by private sector and from non-maritime land-locked states. In response to the said letter the Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry addressed a letter dated April 18, 1996 enclosing therein the material for inviting capital participation by the private sector and non- maritime land-locked states.
One company, i.e., Megah Venture Lines (M) SDN BHD vide letter dated March 28, 1996 addressed to the Secretary (Health & Welfare and Port), Government of Pondicherry, referred to the discussion it had on March 28, 1996 and made a proposal to conduct a Feasibility Study relating to the modernization/privatization of the Pondicherry Port. The said company wanted permission to conduct the said Feasibility Study.
The said proposal was examined by the Director (Ports), Government of Pondicherry and by letter dated April 19, 1996, the Director (Ports), Government of Pondicherry, recommended that as the entire privatization of port was being examined by M/s. RITES India Limited, the study sought to be conducted by M/s. Megah Ventures Lines should be permitted only after tenders for privatization were invited by M/s. RITES India Limited.
The Managing Director of M/s. Mega Ventures Lines along with letter dated January 25, 1997, addressed the then Chief Minister, Pondicherry, enclosed a draft of MOU pursuant to the meeting which had taken place between the then Chief Minister and the officials of M/s. Megah Ventures Lines on January 23, 1997 and claimed that the same was in accordance with the economic policy of the Government of India. The benefits, which were to accrue, were also mentioned in the said letter. The Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry, by his letter dated June 24, 1997, made a proposal to the Under Secretary (Ports), Pondicherry to examine the issue as to whether it would be preferable to call for competitive tenders. It was also mentioned in the said letter that in the meanwhile M/s. RITES India Limited be approached for consultancy services. By the said letter the Director of Ports also proposed that M/s. RITES India Limited be appointed as the consultant for the assignment of selection of suitable entrepreneurs for `additional development facilities of Ariankuppam Port Project' by competitive tenders on BOOST basis. The Director also requested for sanction of Rs. 14 lakhs as expenditure. On September 19, 1997 a meeting was held between the senior officials of the Government of Pondicherry and the Group General Manager of M/s. RITES India Limited. The minutes of the meeting recorded that due to resource crunch at the Centre and State level, the Government of Pondicherry had decided to invite private participation for the development of Pondicherry Port. The minutes also reflected that a decision was taken to call for pre-qualifications bids in order to ascertain the technical capacity and financial soundness of the entrepreneurs. The minutes also indicated that a decision was taken that in order to invite the best parties, the Government of Pondicherry should grant concessions at par with other maritime States. On November 4, 1997 a meeting was held between the officials of the Government of Pondicherry including the then Lt. Governor and the Group General Manager of M/s. RITES India Limited. At the said meeting the officials of M/s. RITES India Limited gave a detailed presentation relating to various aspects of competitive bidding process. At the said meeting a decision was taken to adopt a transparent open competitive bidding procedure in preference to the MOU Route. The minutes of the said meeting also reflected that a decision relating to the appointment of M/s. RITES India Limited as a consultant for this purpose was also taken.
The minutes further recorded that the Pondicherry Port was a minor Port and, therefore, the provisions of Major Ports Trust Act were not applicable. The draft minutes were, thereafter, approved and signed by the officials of the Government of Pondicherry.
On November 6, 1997, a Government Order was issued appointing M/s. RITES India Limited as a consultant. The Consultancy Service Agreement between the Government of Pondicherry and M/s. RITES India Limited was signed on December 10, 1997. The Group General Manager (Ports) by letter dated December 22, 1997 forwarded draft advertisement titled "Invitation for Private Investment in Pondicherry Port", a Draft Invitation Document for "Initial Proposals" and the Draft Agreement to be entered into between the Government of Pondicherry and M/s. RITES India Limited. These draft documents and the draft advertisement were forwarded for the purpose of approval by the competent authority. The draft advertisement and the draft initial proposal were examined by various departments of the Government of Pondicherry. The Secretary (Finance), Government of Pondicherry in his noting dated May 18, 1998 noted that there were long term implications of the Draft Advertisement. He, therefore, recommended that the draft initial proposal and the Draft Agreement be placed before the Council of Ministers. These recommendations were approved by the Chief Secretary, Pondicherry on August 3, 1998 and by the then Chief Minister on August 13, 1998. Accordingly, a Cabinet meeting was convened on January 19, 1999 wherein the agenda of the meeting was to discuss and decide amongst other items, the proposal for privatization of Port and calling for advertisements by M/s. RITES India Limited. The Cabinet in the said meeting resolved to defer the discussion on this item till the next meeting. The said agenda was again circulated to the Ministers of the Cabinet on April 7, 1999 and all the Ministers of the Cabinet approved the proposal for privatization of the Port as well as calling for advertisement by M/s. RITES India Limited. The proposals were finally approved by the Cabinet on October 13, 1999. The then Lt. Governor accorded his approval on October 15, 1999. After the said approval, various departments of the Government of Pondicherry examined the Draft Agreement to be entered into between the Government of Pondicherry and M/s. RITES India Limited. After necessary changes, the agreement was entered into between the parties on January 10, 2000.
7. Relevant facts
The General Manager (Ports) of M/s. RITES India Limited by his letter dated March 16, 2000 informed the Secretary (Ports) Government of Pondicherry that the advertisement seeking interest of the parties for development of Pondicherry Port through private investment had appeared in the Daily Hindustan Times on March 16, 2000 and the same advertisement would appear in editions of the Economic Times, Times of India (Bombay edition), Hindu (Chennai and Delhi editions) and Statesman (Calcutta edition) between 17th to 21st March, 2000. By this advertisement, the Government of Pondicherry sought involvement of the private sector in the development and operation of the Pondicherry Port on BOST basis from reputed and financially sound Indian and/or international parties. The last date for submissions of proposal for pre-qualification of the above project was May 20, 2000. However, the General Manager (Ports) of M/s. RITES India Limited by his letter dated May 9, 2000 sought permission from the Government of Pondicherry for extension of last date by one month, i.e., June 20, 2000, which was approved on May 19, 2000. The General Manager (Ports) of M/s. RITES India Limited by his letter dated June 29, 2000 informed the Principal Secretary (Power), Government of Pondicherry about the developments of private investment in the Pondicherry Port. In the said letter it was mentioned that in response to the advertisement, 48 parties had initially indicated interest in the project and that certain firms were short listed. It was mentioned that the document seeking initial proposals from short listed parties was issued to all interested parties and they were requested to submit their initial proposals by May 20, 2000. However, by the last date for submission of initial proposals, only five parties/ consortiums had submitted their proposals. It was also mentioned in the said letter that the evaluation of the proposals by M/s. RITES India Limited would be submitted on or before July 15, 2000. M/s. RITES India Limited submitted its report on evaluation of initial proposals as well as invitation documents for detailed proposals. The said report indicated that M/s. RITES India Limited had rejected the proposal of one party, i.e., M/s. Rockers (India) Pvt. Ltd. In the report preference regarding remaining four parties was shown as under:
1. M/s. Ashok Leyland of India - 81 marks out of 100 (This firm had unconditionally qualified).
2. M/s. Seaways Shipping Limited of India - 92 marks out of 100 (This firm had qualified with some conditions).
3. M/s. Kvaerner Construction International Ltd. - 73 marks out of 100 (This firm had qualified with some conditions).
4. M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. - 79 marks out of 100 (This Firm had qualified with some conditions).
The short listing of four parties and recommendation of M/s. RITES India Limited to invite detailed proposals from the four parties within five months was approved by the Government of Pondicherry on July 21, 2000. The parties which were short listed subject to certain conditions were asked to provide documentary proof in support of their claims before September 15, 2000.
In consequence thereof, M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. had submitted the requisite documents. Therefore M/s. RITES India Limited confirmed the short listing of consortium of M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. whereas the other two short listed parties had sought extension of time by about two months for furnishing the required documentary proof. Accordingly the General Manager (Ports) of M/s. RITES India Limited had, by his letter dated September 22, 2000, sought approval of the Government of Pondicherry in relation to (a) final confirmation of short listing of consortium of M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. and (b) allowing time up to November 15, 2000 for the parties mentioned at serial numbers 1 and 2 for submitting proof in respect of conditions mentioned by them. The Government of Pondicherry by its communication dated October 8, 2000 informed M/s. RITES India Limited that a decision in this regard would be made after hearing the representations of the consortium parties in the pre bid meeting to be held on October 12, 2000. A pre bid meeting for the development and operation of Pondicherry Port on the basis of the clarifications sought by the short listed parties was held in Delhi on October 13, 2000. This meeting was to clarify all the doubts of the parties in relation to the project prior to the submission of a detailed proposal. The meeting was attended by the Principal Secretary (Power and Ports), Government of Pondicherry, and only three parties/ consortiums, i.e., (i) M/s. Ashok Leyland of India, (ii) M/s. Seaways Shipping Limited of India and (iii) M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. After the said pre bid meeting, only two parties/consortiums submitted their detailed proposals, i.e., M/s. Ashok Leyland of India and M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. sought an extension of time till January 15, 2001 to submit their detailed proposals, which was granted. The General Manager (Ports) of M/s. RITES India Limited by his letter dated January 15, 2001 informed the Principal Secretary (Power and Ports) Government of Pondicherry that till the last date of submission of detailed proposals it had received proposals from two parties, namely, (i) consortium with M/s. Ashok Leyland of India and (ii) consortium with M/s. Durgeshwari Shipping Agency Pvt. Ltd. In the said letter it was mentioned that both the parties had not submitted valid Bank Guarantee as bid securities and, therefore, both the proposals should be rejected straightaway. As only two proposals were received and both were found to be deficient with regard to the bid security deposit, it was recommended that both the parties should be given time of seven to ten working days to enable them to submit valid Bank Guarantees. The Government accordingly extended the time up to January 25, 2001 to enable both the parties to submit valid Bank Guarantees. The General Manager (Ports) of M/s. RITES India Limited by his letter dated January 27, 2001 informed the Principal Secretary (Power and Ports), Government of Pondicherry that even within the extended time limit, the parties mentioned had not submitted valid Bank Guarantees. In the said letter it was stated that the attitude of both the parties had shown utter lack of conviction and commitment to the project. It was further mentioned that the privatization process was not successful. By the said letter the General Manager recommended two other alternative schemes for the development of Pondicherry Port. Those recommendations were examined by various officials of Government of Pondicherry. On the proposals made by the General Manager, the then Lt. Governor of Pondicherry in her note dated March 8, 2001 expressed her desire to have a meeting with the officials of M/s. RITES India Limited. On March 30, 2001 the then Lt. Governor of Pondicherry convened a meeting with the officials of M/s. RITES India Limited. At the said meeting various alternative methods were suggested for the development of the Pondicherry Port. At the said meeting it was decided that a Corporation on the line of Pondicherry Power Corporation be established and a proposal be made to the Planning Commission for the purpose of grant of funds to undertake the development of the Pondicherry Port. This is how the first attempt made by the State Government to develop the Port failed.
Again on February 6, 2003, a meeting was held in the Chamber of the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry regarding the development of Pondicherry Port. The meeting was attended by the Chief Secretary, Secretary (Port), the Director (Port) and a private party. In the said meeting it was decided that an "Expression of Interest" calling for private investment be floated. The Chief Secretary, in his notings dated February 27, 2003, proposed various steps to be undertaken for the development of the Port. One of the steps proposed by him was to immediately issue an Expression of Interest from private parties. He also recommended that the Director (Port) should propose the constitution of a committee of officials to look into the entire gamut of the privatization process as was done in relation to the power sector. The recommendations of the Chief Secretary were approved by the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry on March 6, 2003. In terms of the said decision, an advertisement titled as "Invitation of Expression of Interest for the Development of Pondicherry Port by Private Investment" was published in various newspapers. The advertisement sought private participation of the parties in the development and operation of the project on Build, Own, Operate, Share and Transfer basis. The advertisement also stated that the interested parties should communicate their Expression of Interest within 21 days. In terms of the recommendations made by the Chief Secretary in his letter dated February 27, 2003 a decision was taken by the Government of Pondicherry, which was noted by the Director (Port) in his noting dated March 25, 2003 recommending constitution of a committee to look into all the matters relating to the privatization process. This recommendation was approved by various Government officials including the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry on April 30, 2003 and by the then Lt. Governor of Pondicherry on May 8, 2003. It was further decided that the issue of re-engaging of M/s. RITES India Limited as Consultant should be taken later on. The Government of Pondicherry vide Government Order dated May 13, 2003 constituted a Committee to look into the privatization process of the Port under the Chairmanship of Secretary to Government (Port). After the constitution of the Committee it was decided by the Government to co-opt a representative of the Ministry of Shipping, Government of India. By Government Order dated April 30, 2003, the Ministry of Shipping, Government of India, nominated Mr. P.C. Dhiman as a Member of the Committee. Accordingly, Mr. Dhiman was appointed as a Member of the Committee by the Government of Pondicherry vide Government Order dated August 20, 2003.
The first meeting of the Committee was held on June 2, 2003, which was attended by all the Members of the Committee. In the said meeting various courses of actions were discussed. One of the issues related to seeking of consent of Government of India for the privatization of the Port. It was also decided to seek clarifications from the Ministry of Shipping, Government of India in this regard. The Chief Secretary, Government of Pondicherry in his notings dated June 25, 2003 mentioned that he had discussed the issue with the former Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and he was informed that no permission to develop a minor port like Pondicherry port was required and that the guidelines issued by the Government of India on private sector participation in the Port sector were applicable only to major ports. The Chief Secretary further noted that he had also asked the Assistant Liaison Commissioner, Government of Pondicherry in New Delhi to meet personally the officials of the Ministry of Shipping and report. The Assistant Liaison Commissioner, Government of Pondicherry in New Delhi by his Inter Departmental Report dated June 25, 2003, informed that the management and development of ports was a State subject and, therefore, no clearance from the Central Government was required. Therefore, the Chief Secretary recommended that further steps for privatization of the Port be taken. One of the steps recommended by him was to re-engage M/s. RITES India Limited as a Consultant to the entire process. The then Minister of Ports by his notings dated July 18, 2003 accepted the proposals of the Chief Secretary but noted that instead of engaging M/s. RITES India Limited straightaway, it would be appropriate to issue notice inviting firms or consultants in general. This proposal was approved by the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry.
Therefore necessary advertisements were issued by the Government of Pondicherry. In response to the advertisements, 13 parties submitted Expression of Interest for the development of Pondicherry Port. These parties were asked to give detailed presentation to the Pondicherry Port Privatisation Committee. Out of these 13 parties only six parties made their presentation before the Committee on August 20, 2003. It was noticed that out of six parties only IPCO-Menang, Singapore and Larsen and Toubro, Chennai had experience internationally and nationally in port development and were also the only parties who had requisite technical know-how as well as ability to mobilize funds.
The minutes of the meeting dated August 20, 2003 indicated that M/s. Larsen and Toubro had put certain conditions and wanted certain work to be done by the Port Department. The Committee noticed that the conditions were contrary to the expectation of the Government of Pondicherry and accordingly the Committee proposed to grant Letter of Intent to M/s. IPCO-Menang, Singapore. In terms of the recommendations of the Privatization Committee, the Government of Pondicherry, on September 2, 2003, issued a Letter of Intent to M/s. IPCO-Menang to undertake the preparation of a Detailed Project Report and Feasibility Study for the development of Pondicherry Port. The Detailed Project Report as well as Feasibility Study Report were to be submitted by November 5, 2003. M/s. IPCO-Menang was not able to submit the above mentioned Reports by November 5, 2003. In fact the said company through its communication dated November 19, 2003 had requested the Director of Ports to extend the time to submit the report till December 31, 2003. In response thereof, the Director of Port, by his letter dated November 19, 2003, informed the said company that the request for extension of time limit up to December 31, 2003 could be considered only on the condition that the company deposited an amount of Rs. 50 lakhs to show its seriousness and commitment towards implementation of the project. The said company neither submitted the Reports by December 31, 2003 nor deposited the amount. In these circumstances, the Government of Pondicherry decided to grant Letter of Intent to the other party, which was short listed, i.e., M/s Larsen and Toubro, Chennai. This decision was approved by the Minister of Ports on April 5, 2004. A Letter of Intent dated April 30, 2004 was issued to M/s. Larsen and Toubro, Chennai. The said company did not respond to the issuance of Letter of Intent. In such circumstances, the second attempt for getting private investments for development of Pondicherry Port also resulted into a failure.
Sometimes in September 2004, the Chief Secretary, Government of Pondicherry had a meeting with the officials of Ministry of Shipping, Government of India, relating to the development of Pondicherry Port. In the said meeting the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Shipping had informed that it would be possible to provide an amount of Rs. 20 lakhs for the purpose of preparing a Feasibility Study Report and the rest of the expenditure should be born by the State Government. The Chief Secretary, Government of Pondicherry by his letter dated September 6, 2004 requested the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping, Government of India to provide an amount of Rs. 50 lakhs for the purpose of making the Feasibility Study Report. A copy of the letter was sent to the Director of Ports with a request to issue a press release in the newspapers calling proposals from the interested parties for preparation of Feasibility Study Report. The objective of the entire exercise was to get prepared a Feasibility Study Report so that a private investor might not be required to conduct the study prior to decide whether the private investor would be required to invest or not. It was the understanding of the Government of Pondicherry that in such an event the possibility of attracting private investments in the development of Port would substantially increase.
In terms of letter dated September 6, 2004 the Director (Ports) submitted a proposal for issuing an advertisement in various newspapers thereby calling for the interested parties to prepare the Feasibility Study Report. This proposal was approved by the Secretary (Ports)/Chief Secretary. In response to the letter dated September 6, 2004 the Ministry of Shipping, Government of India by its letter dated September 30, 2004 informed the Chief Secretary, Government of Pondicherry that in terms of the guidelines framed by the Ministry, the Central assistance would be restricted to 50% of the expenditure to be incurred by the State Government and the annual ceiling fixed was Rs. 20 lakhs for a State in a year on reimbursement basis. On October 5, 2004, the officials of one company, i.e., Apollo Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Limited, had a meeting with the Minister of Port, Government of Pondicherry regarding the development of the Port. The company sought time from the Minister to make a technical and financial presentation in this regard. The said company also, by its letter dated November 22, 2004, requested for an opportunity to submit a technical report. Another company, i.e., Subhash Project and Marketing Limited -respondent No. 11 herein - (`SPML' for short), by its letter dated October 6, 2004, submitted an Expression of Interest for development of ports, which is a Special Economic Zone in Pondicherry. The company, by its letter dated November 4, 2004, intimated the Principal Secretary (Port) that they had identified their partner who would be associated in the work and requested for an appointment to make a presentation to the Principal Secretary. The Director (Ports) submitted a proposal for issuing an advertisement seeking "Expression of Interest" from the consultants for the preparation of Feasibility Study Report for the development of Pondicherry Port. Based on this proposal a decision was taken to issue an advertisement in various newspapers in this regard. Accordingly, an advertisement was published in various newspapers. In terms of the said advertisement the consultants, interested in undertaking a Feasibility Study for the Pondicherry Port Development, were required to submit their Expression of Interest to the Director of Ports within 21 days from the date of publication of the advertisement. In pursuance of the advertisement, 33 firms/companies had responded and submitted their Expression of Interest. Out of these 33 firms/companies, 27 firms/companies had responded within the time limit specified in the advertisement. One of such consortium (i.e. MOH Group) submitted their Expression of Interest vide letter dated November 21, 2004. The Director of Ports in his proposal dated November 24, 2004 recommended that the remaining six firms/companies, which had not responded within the time stipulated in the advertisement, should also be considered for the purpose of obtaining a Feasibility Study Report to ensure maximum benefit from the advertisement. The Director of Ports also recommended that the Port Privatisation Committee, including the Member co-opted from the Ministry of Shipping, Government of India, constituted in the earlier round, should examine the proposals made by the firms/ companies. The proposal was examined and approved by various officials of the Government of Pondicherry and it was decided that the firms/companies should be called upon to make their presentation before the Committee from December 6, 2004 to December 8, 2004. In relation to the remaining six firms/companies, who had submitted their Expression of Interest after the time limit, it was recommended by the Under Secretary (Port) in his noting dated December 3, 2004 that they should not be considered in view of previous experience and the General Financial Rules, 1963. This recommendation was accepted by the Secretary (Port)/Chief Secretary, Government of Pondicherry, which is quite evident from his noting dated December 6, 2004. Under the circumstances, it was decided to exclude those six firms/companies from the exercise undertaken for obtaining the Feasibility Study Report. On various dates the Port Department, Government of Pondicherry, issued e-mails to the 27 firms/companies to make a presentation on the Expression of Interest for the preparation of the Feasibility Study Report. These e- mails were sent between December 2, 2004 and December 4, 2004. Out of these 27 firms/companies, 10 firms/companies made their presentation on December 6, 2004. However, due to certain other pre-occupations, the date for presentation was shifted to December 8, 2004. The other 10 firms/ companies were requested to make their presentation on December 7, 2004, whereas the remaining 7 other firms/ companies were requested to make their presentation on December 8, 2004. Thus in all, 27 firms/companies were invited to make their presentation before the Committee.
On December 3, 2004 the Vice President of Marshall Power & Consultancy Services informed the Director of Ports by e-mail that the officials of the company were busy on 7th and 8th of December, 2004 and, therefore, meeting dated December 11, 2004 be postponed. Similarly, the Advisor to Scott-Wilson Kirkpatrick (P) Ltd. by e-mail dated December 3, 2004 sought for an alternative date of December 10, 2004. Another company, i.e., WAPCOS, through its e-mail dated December 3, 2004, informed the Director of Ports that its officials would not be able to reach for presentation and sent necessary materials by courier. STUP Consultants P. Ltd. vide its e-mail dated December 6, 2004 informed the Director of Ports that it be allowed to make the presentation on December 9, 2004. Mac Knight Infrastructure P. Ltd., by its e-mail dated December 6, 2004, informed the Director of Ports that due to prior and conflicting commitments, its official would not be able to appear and requested for an alternative date. The Director and Chief Operating Officer, DS Constructions vide letter dated December 7, 2004 informed the Director of Ports that officials of the Company wanted to make presentation on development and construction of the Pondicherry Port. The Vice President of SPML through its e-mail dated December 7, 2004, informed the Director of Ports that they were going to develop and operate the ports and would like to work more as an operator and a developer. By the said e-mail the said company requested for an opportunity to enable it to make a presentation. On December 7, 2004 and December 8, 2004 various firms/companies made presentations before the Committee. The parties, who made their presentations, were as under:
1. Hauer Associates, Chennai, made the presentation on December 7, 2004.
2. D.S. Constructions made the presentation on December 7, 2004.
3. Howe India made the presentation on December 7, 2004.
4. Price Water House Corpus, Chennai, made the presentation on December 7, 2004.
5. Royal Haskoning, Delhi, made the presentation on December 7, 2004.
6. CRISIL made the presentation on December 7, 2004.
7. Mahindra Acres Consulting, Chennai, made the presentation on December 7, 2004.
8. National Institute of Port Management, Chennai, made the presentation on December 8, 2004.
9. Cullen Grummit & Roe, Bombay, made the presentation on December 8, 2004. 10. Deloitte, Chennai, made the presentation on December 8, 2004.
11. A.F. Ferguson, Chennai, made the presentation on December 8, 2004.
Certain parties were unable to make their presentations on the above mentioned dates and, therefore, the Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry, by his e-mails dated December 10, 2004, requested the following parties again to make a presentation on the preparation of the Feasibility Report, on December 17, 2004. The parties, to whom the said e-mails were dispatched, were as under:
1. Scott Wilson Kirkpatrick India Pvt. Ltd.
2. Indian Ports Association, New Delhi.
3. Sree Eikon Constructions, Chennai.
4. Mott Macdonald, Mumbai.
5. Subhash Projects & Marketing Limited
6. Consulting Engineering Services India Limited
7. MECON Ltd., Ranchi.
8. Marshall's Power & Telecommunication Limited, Bangalore.
9. Larsen and Toubro, Ramboll
10. Mac Knight Infrastructure Private Ltd., Mumbai.
11. Beckett Rankine Partnership, Bombay.
12. National Institute of Oceanography.
In the meantime one company named Menang Amalgamated Sdn Bhd vide its fax message dated December 15, 2004 addressed a communication, to the Minister of Port, Secretary of Port and Director of Port, making a reference to the letter dated December 30, 2003 and stated that the company was in the process of finalizing the Detailed Project Report as well as the Feasibility Study Report and that the company was keen on exploring ways to move forward after depositing the earnest money of Rs. 50 lakhs. It may be stated that the letter was sent after more than a year from the date the company was supposed to submit its report. In terms of the e-mails dated December 10, 2004 the following firms/ companies made their presentations on December 17, 2004 before the Committee:
1. Consulting Engineering Services, New Delhi
2. Beckett Rankine, Mumbai
3. STUP Consultants, Mumbai
4. L & T Ramboll, Chennai.
The minutes of the meetings dated December 7, 2004, December 8, 2004 and December 17, 2004 indicate the nature of presentations, made by various parties. The presentations included modes of development, etc. The minutes of the meetings show that the Chief Secretary/ Secretary (Port), Government of Pondicherry while going through the presentations of every party had asked them whether they would be able to develop the Pondicherry Port and would able to bring in investors for the purpose of developing the Port. The minutes further reflect that certain parties, like Hauer Associates, Haskoning India Private Limited, CRISIL Infrastructure Advisory, Consulting Engineering Services India Limited, Beckett Rankine Partnership, informed the Committee that they might be able to get a private investor only at a later stage or after seeking certain clarifications. These firms/companies were, however, not willing to develop and operate the Pondicherry Port. The minutes also reflected that only two companies, i.e., M/s. Apollo Infrastructure and M/s. D.S. Constructions stated that they would be able to develop the Pondicherry Port on their own.
The General Manager (Ports) of M/s. Larsen and Toubro, Chennai, by his letter dated December 22, 2004, informed the Chief Secretary/Secretary (Port), Government of Pondicherry that the company was willing to develop the Pondicherry Port. The said letter also referred to a meeting held on December 20, 2004 with the Chief Secretary and stated that the company be allowed to enter into MOU with the Government of Pondicherry for the development of Pondicherry Port. This letter was received by Directorate of Ports on December 27, 2004. M/s. Apollo Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Limited, by its letter dated December 23, 2004, informed the Minister of Ports, Government of Pondicherry that it was willing to develop Pondicherry Port on DBOOT basis and proposed certain Development Phases. This letter was received on December 31, 2004. In the said letter a reference was made to the presentation made by the company on December 17, 2004. These letters as well as minutes of the meetings of the Port Privatisation Committee clearly show that certain firms/companies were keen to develop and operate the Port. The Director of Ports by his letter dated January 12, 2005 forwarded a short note on the proposals submitted by 27 firms/companies. It is clear from the said note that the proposals received from the firms/ companies were examined on the basis of their experience in preparing the Feasibility Report as well as in conducting the consultancy services in Port Sector in India and abroad. This short note was prepared from the view point of selecting a consultant to prepare a Feasibility Study Report and not from the view point of selecting a developer/operator for the purpose of operating the Port. In the earlier process of privatization, two companies were short listed and were granted Letters of Intent. Those two companies, i.e., (i) IPCO Menang, Singapore and (ii) M/s. Larsen and Toubro, Chennai, did not submit the requisite reports and, therefore, their claim lapsed. These two companies by letters dated December 15, 2004 and December 22, 2004 respectively again expressed their interest in developing the Pondicherry Port. In view of these letters, the Director of Ports by his letter dated January 7, 2005 sought a decision from the Under Secretary (Port) about the future course of action to be adopted. The Under Secretary (Port) in his note dated January 19, 2005 recounted the facts and circumstances in which the Letters of Intent were issued as well as the conduct of the parties. The file was thereafter submitted to the Secretary (Port)/Chief Secretary for necessary orders. The Chief Secretary, who was also Chairman of the Port Privatisation Committee, by his note dated January 19, 2005, noticed that the Port Privatisation Committee in its meeting had short listed two parties and recommended that the Government should consider short-listing M/s. Larsen and Toubro, Chennai as the third party. It was mentioned in the note that this was subject to the approval of the Government. He also recommended that the legal position with regard to the first two parties, who had desired to prepare Feasibility Report, should be examined and thereafter the project should be allotted. An Inter Departmental Note dated January 20, 2005 was prepared. In the said note the Under Secretary (Ports) referred to the notings made by the Chief Secretary on January 19, 2005 and directed the Director of Ports to send a proposal to the Law Department for getting confirmation. In terms of the said note a proposal dated January 25, 2005 was made by the Director of Ports, who is also a Member of the Port Privatisation Committee. In his proposal, he pointed out the recommendation made by the Chief Secretary in his notings and stated that the two parties mentioned in the notings, i.e., (1) M/s. D.S. Construction, which had applied for the preparation of the Feasibility Study Report and was willing to take development of the Port and (2) M/s. Apollo Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Limited, could be considered. The other party, which was recommended for short listing, was M/s. Larsen and Toubro, Chennai. It was pointed out that the three parties were short listed since they had shown interest in developing the Port by Private Investment. In response to the proposal for the Inter Departmental Note dated January 25, 2005, the Law Department, Government of Pondicherry, by its noting dated February 17, 2005, stated that any consultancy firm, who was entrusted the work of preparing the Feasibility Study Report, should only select the promoter and cite example whether it was so done. The Law Department further pointed out that clearance from the Government should be taken in respect of various issues involved in the proposal. The said noting of the Law Department was examined by the Chief Secretary. The Chief Secretary in his noting dated February 24, 2005 noted that the issue of seeking clearance from the Government of India had already been clarified by his predecessor-in-Office vide noting dated June 25, 2003 and, therefore, the said issue should not delay the consideration of the matter. During this period certain parties expressed their interest in developing the Pondicherry Port. One company, i.e., Water-Bau-AG, through its communication dated January 23, 2005, informed the Chief Secretary, Government of Pondicherry about its desire to participate in a Deep Sea Project on BOT basis and submitted its profile. This letter was received by the Directorate of Ports on February 2, 2005. Similarly, another company, i.e., Digital Hub Sdn Bhd through its letter informed the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry that they wanted to participate in a Deep Sea Project on BOT basis and submitted its analysis. In the meantime on February 2, 2005, the Chief Secretary had a meeting with Lt. Governor of Pondicherry. The noting of the Executive Engineer, Directorate of Ports, Government of Pondicherry dated February 2, 2005 indicate that after the meeting, the Chief Secretary directed that a list of all the firms, which had expressed their interest to develop the Port through Private Investment, be forwarded to him. In terms of the said direction the Director of Ports by his letter dated February 3, 2005 gave the list of 11 firms and companies, which had expressed desire to develop the Port through Private Investment. It was also mentioned therein that out of 11 firms/companies, seven firms/companies had already made their presentation before the Port Privatisation Committee on different dates. The note was examined by various Government officials and it was decided that the remaining four firms/corporations should be again invited for making a presentation before the Committee. The Director of Ports through e-mails dated February 25, 2005 invited above mentioned four firms/companies to make their presentations on March 11, 2005. The firms/companies were (1) Subhash Projects and Marketing Limited, New Delhi, (2) Marshall Power & Telecom (I) Ltd., Bangalore, (3) Digital Hub SDN BHD, Malaysia and (4) Walter Bau AG, Germany. M/s. SPML, through its letter dated February 4, 2005, informed the Principal Secretary (Port), Government of Pondicherry that earlier it had not taken interest in the project, but the said company expressed its desire for development of the Port, Beaches, etc. Similarly, the General Manager (Tech.), Ashoka Buildcon Limited by his letter dated February 7, 2005, informed the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry that they had joined hands with an overseas Port Developer and, therefore, would like to offer services for the Port Project in Pondicherry on BDOOT basis. M/s. Apollo Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Limited by its letter dated February 8, 2005 informed the Minister of Ports, Government of Pondicherry that it had entered into a joint venture agreement with L&T Romboll, Chennai. Similarly, LAV. JAY and Associates Pvt. Ltd. through its letter dated February 14, 2005 informed the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry that the said company was part of a consortium comprising of Royal Hoskoning and Ashoka Buildcon. The said company also pointed out that it would like to develop Pondicherry Port in a unique manner. The said consortium also forwarded one letter from the Director Operations, Royal Haskonin to Lav. Jay and Associates wherein Royal Haskonin confirmed that they were able to provide consultancy service to Lav. Jay for the purpose of development of Port. The Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry by his e-mail dated March 1, 2005 informed the consortium led by M/s. LAV. JAY and Associates that if they were interested in developing the Pondicherry Port, they were free to make presentation on March 11, 2005. In response thereto, M/s. U-Pranav Consultancy, who was acting on behalf of the consortium vide its e-mail dated March 8, 2005, confirmed that they would be able to make the presentation on March 11, 2005. The Director (Operations) of M/s. Royal Haskoning by his letter dated March 11, 2003 apologised to the then Chief Minister of Pondicherry for absence of its officials on March 11, 2005 and requested that an opportunity be provided to enable it to make presentation on March 14, 2005.
M/s. Digital Hub vide its e-mail dated March 7, 2005 informed the Deputy Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry that they would not be able to get their investor from Germany. The Chief Executive Officer of M/s. SPML vide letter dated March 7, 2005 informed the Director of Ports that it would make a presentation on March 11, 2005. The following statement indicates that on March 11, 2005 following firms/companies had made presentations before the Port Privatisation Committee:
On March 11, 2005 a consortium led by M/s. SPML made its presentation. The minutes of the meetings of the Committee held on December 7, 2004, December 8, 2004, December 17, 2004 and March 11, 2005 show that the advertisement dated October 18, 2004 was only for the purpose of conducting the Feasibility Study. The minutes further indicate that certain other firms had also come forward with offers for the development of the Port. The minutes of the meetings clearly show that after discussions and on the basis of the presentations four firms were short listed in the following preferences:
1. M/s. Subhash Projects and Marketing Limited
2. M/s. D.S. Constructions
3. M/s. Apollo Infrastructure Projects Finance Company Limited
4. M/s. Larsen and Toubro, Chennai
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Letter of Intent be issued to M/s. SPML. The Committee also felt that the development of Pondicherry Port was of considerable importance and, therefore, the company rightly recommended to the Government that Government should appoint the National Institute of Port Management, Chennai (NIPM) as a Consultant to the Government of Pondicherry for the eventual development of the Port.
The Under Secretary (Ports), Government of Pondicherry issued a Letter of Intent dated June 3, 2005 in favour of M/s. SPML. It was stated in the said letter that it was proposed to engage the said company for the development of Pondicherry Port on BOT basis and the Letter of Intent was subject to the condition that Detailed Project Report was approved by the Competent Authority. It was mentioned in the said letter that the said company would have to undertake the preparation of a Detailed Project Report and Feasibility Study at its own cost. It was also mentioned therein that the Detailed Project Report should be submitted within 45 days from the date of issue of the letter and if the company agreed upon the conditions stipulated in Letter of Intent then the company should deposit a Bank Guarantee of Rs. 50 lakhs within a period of 15 days.
In terms of the aforesaid Letter of Intent, the company made available a Bank Guarantee to the Government of Pondicherry on June 18, 2005. The company, along with its letter dated July 18, 2005, submitted a Detailed Project Report to the Government of Pondicherry. In terms of the recommendations of the Committee for Port Privatisation the Government of Pondicherry by order dated August 4, 2005 appointed National Institute of Port Management, Chennai as a Consultant for the development of the Port. The Under Secretary (Port), Government of Pondicherry, by his letter dated August 4, 2005, forwarded a Detailed Project Report submitted by M/s. SPML to NIPM with a request to make a detailed analysis and evaluation of technical, financial, environmental and legal aspects on the Detailed Project Report. The Detailed Project Report was examined in a meeting held on August 31, 2005 and various draw-backs such as traffic forecast, detailing of the plans, etc. emerging from the Detailed Project Report were examined. It was thereafter decided that M/s. SPML should have a re-look on the issues raised and revise the Detailed Project Report suitably. The NIPM submitted its draft report on September 13, 2005. In terms of the discussions held on August 31, 2005, M/s. SPML by its letter dated September 23, 2005 submitted the First Revised Detailed Project Report to the Director of Ports. The meeting was held on September 24, 2005 and it was agreed that NIPM would examine the First Revised Detailed Project Report and submit a report. The reports submitted were examined. M/s. SPML submitted the Second Revised Detailed Project Report along with its letter dated October 5, 2005, after which a meeting was held on November 12, 2005. In the said meeting officials of M/s. SPML, the officials of M/s. NIPM and the officials of the Government of Pondicherry were present and the minutes were drawn and noted. In pursuance thereof NIPM submitted its final report on December 1, 2005. The issues raised by all the parties concerned were resolved and, therefore, the Second Revised Detailed Project Report was accepted by the Government as Approved Detailed Project Report. The Government of Pondicherry thereafter constituted a Committee to draft the Concession Agreement to be entered into between the Government of Pondicherry and M/s. SPML. The Committee examined various model Concession Agreement of various States and more specifically of Gujarat State. The said Concession Agreement was thereafter drafted on the basis of the Approved Detailed Project Report. The said draft agreement was examined and approved by various departments of the Government of Pondicherry. The draft agreement was placed before the Council of Ministers for its approval. The Council of Ministers in a meeting dated January 20, 2006 approved the same and resolved that the existing Port Land of 153 acres be handed over for Port development whereas remaining 107 acres should be acquired and handed over within 180 days to SPML. It was further resolved that a lease amount of Rs. 2,000/- per acre per annum should be charged from SPML. The order dated January 21, 2006 issued by the Government of Pondicherry indicates that approval of the Lt. Governor of Pondicherry was obtained to the Detailed Project Report as revised on November 16, 2005 for the development of Port on BOT basis. The Government Order also mentions that approval was also granted to the Concession Agreement to be entered into between the Government of Pondicherry and SPML along with its consortium partners. On January 21, 2006 the Government of Pondicherry entered into a Concession Agreement with SPML along with its consortium partners. On January 24, 2006 the Director of Ports, Government of Pondicherry issued an Office Memorandum in favour of SPML. By the said Memorandum all the existing moveable/immovable assets of the Port were to be handed over to the developer as per the Concession Agreement.
8. The Letter of Intent dated June 3, 2005, granted to SPML - Respondent No. 11 - as well as approval dated January 2, 2006 accorded by the Lt. Governor of Pondicherry to the Detailed Project Report dated November 16, 2005 submitted by respondent No. 11 on BOT basis and to the Concession Agreement to be entered into between the Government of Pondicherry and the respondent No. 11 as well as direction dated January 24, 2006 issued by the Director of Ports to the officers concerned to prepare list of all the existing moveable and Immovable assets of the Pondicherry Port for handing over the same to respondent No. 11 were challenged by the appellants by filing Writ Petition No. 3304 of 2006 and Writ Petition 12337 of 2006 before the Madras High Court on several grounds.
9. The Madras High Court has rejected the two petitions giving rise to the instant appeals.
10. We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties at length and in great detail and considered the documents forming part of the two appeals.
11. Mr. G.E. Vahanvati, learned Solicitor General of India, spelt out three preliminary objections, namely, (1) the appellants had fairly conceded before the High Court that the selection of the Developer was correctly done and, therefore, the argument advanced by the learned Counsel for the appellants, assailing the selection of the respondent No. 11 as Developer of Pondicherry Port, should not be considered by this Court at all and this Court should confine itself to examination of environmental impact that the project may have, which was emphasized before the High Court; (2) the appellants had no locus standi to file the writ petition challenging the Award of Contract for the development of the Pondicherry Port to the respondent No. 11, which is purely commercial in nature; and (3) the list of events and dates submitted by the appellants is not only misleading but a calculated attempt made by the appellants to prejudice the Court by suppressing and omitting to make reference to relevant materials and events and, therefore, the appeals should be dismissed.
12. Dealing with the first preliminary objection, raised on behalf of the respondents, this Court finds that in paragraph 19 of the impugned judgment the High Court has observed as under:
19. It is at this juncture, the learned Counsel for the petitioners fairly conceded that his clients' concern was more on the environmental impact that the project may have and he was not canvassing the relative merits of the parties, who had submitted offer to the Government of Pondicherry. He requested the Court to safeguard the interest of the general public and future development of the Union Territory of Pondicherry with reference to the development of the Pondicherry Port.
A fair and reasonable reading of the above quoted paragraph makes it very clear that the appellants had fairly conceded before the High Court that they were not assailing the selection of the respondent No. 11 as Developer for the Pondicherry Port, but were more concerned with the environmental impact that the project may have and, therefore, the learned Counsel for the appellants had requested the Court to safeguard the interest of general public and future development of the Union Territory of Pondicherry with reference to the development of the Pondicherry Port. It is relevant to notice that in the grounds of memorandum of the Special Leave Petitions it is not contended by the appellants that no concession was made by the learned Counsel before the High Court or the concession made was different and was not correctly recorded by the High Court. The respondent Nos. 2 to 9 have filed counter affidavit to the Special Leave Petitions filed by the appellants. The respondents, in paragraphs 6 and 7 of the counter affidavit filed before this Court, have stated as under:
6. I also say that the Hon'ble High Court, during the course of the arguments and after examining the documents, had expressed its view that the selection of the Developer was correctly done. In these circumstances, the Hon'ble High Court ascertained from the petitioner herein whether it would like to concede on the issue of selection of the Developer and agitate its concerns in relation to the Environmental Impact of the project.
7. I say that the Counsel for the Petitioner sought for a pass over of the matter and requested the Hon'ble Court to list the matter in the second half on the same day i.e. at 2.15 p.m. This was to enable the Counsel for the present Petitioner to get his instructions. I also say that in the afternoon, the Counsel for the Petitioner pointed out to the Hon'ble Court that he could not get in touch with his Clients and therefore sought an adjournment on the said date to seek instructions from his client. That on the next date the counsel for the Petitioner informed the Hon'ble Court that his client had instructed him to concede on the issue of the selection of the Developer. However, he pointed out that his client seeks certain safeguards relating to the issue of environmental impact. In this regard, the Petitioner's counsel also handed over a note containing the desired directions from the Hon'ble High Court.
Though the appellants were duly served with a copy of the counter affidavit filed by the respondent Nos. 2 to 9, they have failed to traverse the assertions and averments made in paragraphs 5 to 6 of the counter affidavit reproduced above. From the above quoted untraversed paragraphs of the reply affidavit, it is evident that during the course of the arguments and after examining the documents, the High Court had expressed its view that the selection of the Developer was correctly made and, therefore, in those circumstances, the High Court had ascertained from the appellants as to whether they would like to concede on the issue of selection of the Developer and agitate its concern in relation to the environmental impact of the project. The above quoted paragraphs further make it clear beyond pale of doubt that the learned Counsel for the appellants had sought for a pass over of the matter and requested the Court to take up the matter in the second half on the same day at 2.15 P.M. to enable him to get instructions from the appellants. It is also evident that the learned Counsel for the appellants pointed out to the court that he was not able to get in touch with his clients and, therefore, sought an adjournment to seek instructions from the appellants. What is relevant to notice is that on the next date of hearing the learned Counsel for the appellants had informed the High Court that his clients had instructed him to concede on the issue of selection of the Developer, but had pointed out that his clients were seeking certain safeguards relating to the issue of environmental impact of the project and had handed over a note containing the desired directions from the High Court. The fact that the learned Counsel for the appellants had handed over the note to the High Court is admitted but it is alleged that since the conditions mentioned in the note were not accepted, there was no concession as is sought to be made out by the respondents. Having gone through the proceedings before the High Court, this Court finds that the assertion made on behalf of the appellants is factually wrong. The judgment, impugned in the appeals, incorporates the concerns of the appellants as reflected in the note in the form of directions, which are to be found in paragraph 24 of the impugned judgment. No application was filed by the appellants before the High Court making a grievance that concession was never made and/or was wrongly recorded by the court. On the facts and in the circumstances of the case, this Court is of the firm opinion that the appellants had fairly conceded before the High Court that the selection of the respondent No. 11 as Developer of the Pondicherry Port was never canvassed nor the relative merits of the parties were pointed out to the High Court and, therefore, the High Court has not recorded any finding as to whether selection of the Respondent No. 11 as Developer was correct or not. In view of the concession made by the appellants, the appellants are not entitled to canvass before this Court that the selection of the respondent No. 11 as Developer of the Pondicherry Port was not correctly made.
13. As far as second preliminary objection regarding locus standi of the appellant to challenge the Award of the Contract for the development of the Pondicherry Port to the respondent No. 11 is concerned, this Court finds that the contract assailed in the writ petitions is purely commercial in nature. Neither the parties, which had participated in the process of selection of the consultant/Developer nor one of those, who had expressed desire to develop the Pondicherry Port but was not selected, has come forward to challenge the selection procedure adopted by the Government of Pondicherry or the selection of the respondent No. 11 as Developer of the Pondicherry Port. The question of locus standi in the matter of awarding the contract has been considered by this Court in BALCO Employees' Union (Regd.) v. Union of India MANU/SC/0779/2001 : (2002)ILLJ550SC . This Court, after review of law on the point, has made following observations in paragraph 88 of the judgment:
88. It will be seen that whenever the Court has interfered and given directions while entertaining PIL it has mainly been where there has been an element of violation of Article 21 or of human rights or where the litigation has been initiated for the benefit of the poor and the underprivileged who are unable to come to court due to some disadvantage. In those cases also it is the legal rights which are secured by the courts. We may, however, add that public interest litigation was not meant to be a weapon to challenge the financial or economic decisions which are taken by the Government in exercise of their administrative power. No doubt a person personally aggrieved by any such decision, which he regards as illegal, can impugn the same in a court of law, but, a public interest litigation at the behest of a stranger ought not to be entertained. Such a litigation cannot per se be on behalf of the poor and the downtrodden, unless the court is satisfied that there has been violation of Article 21 and the persons adversely affected are unable to approach the court.